welcome to the huberman lab podcast, where we discuss science science-based tools for everyday life. i'm andrew huberman, and i'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at stanford school of medicine. today. my guest is dr. jack feldman. dr. jack feldman is a distinguished professor of neurobiology at the university of california, los angeles. he is known for his pioneering work on the neuroscience of breathing. we are all familiar with breathing and how essential breathing is to life. we require oxygen, and it is only by breathing that we can bring oxygen to all the cells of our brain and body. however, as the work from dr feldman and colleagues tells us breathing is also fundamental to oregon health and function at an enormous number of other levels. in fact, how we breathe, including how often we breathe, the depth of our breathing and the ratio of inhales to exhales actually predicts how focused we are, how easily we get into sleep, how easily we can exit from sleep. dr. feldman gets credit for the discovery of the two major brain centers that control the different patterns of breathing today. you'll learn about those brain centers and the patterns of breathing they control and how those different patterns of breathing influence all aspects of your mental and physical life. what's especially wonderful about dr. feldman and his work is that it not only points to the critical role of respiration in disease, in health and in daily life, but he's also a practitioner. he understands how to leverage particular aspects of the breathing process in order to bias the brain to be in particular states that can benefit us all, whether or not you are a person who already practices breath work, or whether or not you're somebody who simply breathe to stay alive. by the end of today's discussion, you're going to understand a tremendous amount about how the breathing system works and how you can leverage that breathing system toward particular goals in your life. dr. feldman shares with us his own particular breathing protocols that he uses, and he suggests different avenues for exploring respiration in ways that can allow you, for instance, to be more focused for work, to disengage from work and high stress endeavors, to calm down quickly. and indeed he explains not only how to do that, but all the underlying science in ways that will allow you to customize your own protocols for your needs. all the guests that we bring on the huberman lab podcast are considered at the very top of their fields. today's guest, dr. feldman is not only at the top of his field. he founded the field prior to his coming into neuroscience from the field of physics. there really wasn't much information about how the brain controls breathing. there was a little bit of information, but we can really credit dr. feldman and his laboratory for identifying the particular brain areas that control different patterns of breathing and how that information can be leveraged towards health, high performance and for combating disease. so today's conversation. you're going to learn a tremendous amount from the top researcher in this field. it's a really wonderful and special opportunity to be able to his knowledge with you. and i know that you're not only going to enjoy it, but you are going to learn a tremendous amount before we begin. i'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at stanford. it is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme, i'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. thanks for joining me today. it's a pleasure to be, are you drew? yeah, it's been a long time coming. you're my go-to source for all things respiration. i mean, i breathe on my own, but when i want to understand how i breathe and how the brain and breathing interact, you're the person i call do my best. there's, you know, there's a lot that we don't understand, which still keeps me employed and engaged, but we do know a lot. okay. why don't we start off by just talking about what's involved in generating breath. and if you would, could you comment on some of the mechanisms for rhythmic breathing versus non rib rhythmic breathing? okay. so on the mechanical side, which is obvious to everyone, we want that vf flow in inhale, and we need to have air flow out. and the reason we need to do this is because for body metabolism, we need oxygen. and when oxygen is utilized through the metal aerobic metabolic process, we produce carbon dioxide. and so we have to get rid of the carbon dioxide that we produce in particular because the carbon dioxide affects the essa base balance of the blood, the ph and all living cells are very sensitive to what the ph value is. so your body is very interested in regulating that ph. so we have to have enough oxygen for our normal metabolism, and we have to get rid of the co2 that we produce. so how do we generate this air flow? well, the outcomes into the lungs, we have to expand the lungs. and as the lungs expand, basically, it's like a balloon that you would pull apart. the pressure inside that balloon drops and the air will flow into the balloon. so we expand, pull a pressure on, put pressure on the lung to pull it apart. that lowers the pressure in the air. sacs called alveoli and air will flow in because pressure outside the body is higher than pressure inside the body. when you're doing this expansion, when you inhaling, what produces that? one of the principle muscle is the diaphragm, which is sitting inside the body just below the lung. and when you want to inhale, you basically contract the diaphragm and it pulls it down. and it's suppose that down. it's inserting pressure forces on the lung. the lung wants to expand at the same time, the rib cage is going to rotate up and out and therefore expanding the cavity, the thoracic cavity at the end of inspiration and the normal conditions. when you were addressed, you just relax and it's like pulling on a spring. you pull down a spring and you let go and relax. so you inhale and you exhale, inhale, relax, and exhale. so the exhale is passive at rest. it's passive. we'll get into what happens when you need to increase the amount of air you bringing in because your ventilation, your metabolism goes up like during exercise. now the muscles themselves, skeletal muscles don't do anything unless the nervous system tells them to do something. and when the nervous system tells them to do something, they contract. so there are specialized neurons in the spinal cord, and then above the spinal cord, the region called the brainstem, which go to respiratory muscles in particular for inspiration, the diaphragm and the external intercostal muscles in the rib cage. and they contract. so these respiratory muscles thesis' batory muscles become active and then become active for a period of time. then they become silent. and when they become silent, the muscles then relax back to their original resting level. where does that activity in the, these neurons that innovate the muscle, which are called motor neurons? where does that originate? well, this was a question that's been bandied around for thousands of years. and when i was a beginning assistant professor, it was fairly high priority for me to try and figure that out, because i wanted to understand where this rhythm of breathing was coming from. and you couldn't know where it's coming from until you knew where it was coming from. and i didn't phrase that properly. you couldn't understand how it was being done until you know where to look. so we did a lot of experiments, which i can go into detail and finally found there was a region in the brainstem that's once again, this region sort of above the spinal cord, which was critical for generating this rhythm, it's called the <em></em> complex. and we can talk about how that was named this small site, which contains in humans, a few thousand neurons. it's located on either side and works in tandem. and every breath begins with neurons in this region beginning to be active. and those neurons then connect ultimately to these motor neurons, going to the diaphragm and to the external intercostals causing them to be active in causing this tory effort when the neurons and the pre or complex finish their burst of activity, then inspiration stops. and then you begin to exhale because of this passive recoil of the lung and rib cage. could i just briefly interrupt you to ask a few quick questions before we move forward in this very informative i answer. and the two questions are, is there anything known about the activation of the diaphragm in the intercostal muscles between the ribs as it relates to nose versus mouth breathing, or are they activated in the equivalent way, regardless of whether or not someone is breathing through their nose or mouth? i don't think we fully have the answer to that. clearly there are differences between nasal and mouth breathing at rest. the tendency is to do nasal breathing because the air flows that are necessary for normal breathing as easily managed by passing through the nasal cavities. however, when your ventilation needs to increase, like during exercise, you need to move more air. you do that through your mouth because the airways are much larger than, and therefore you can move much more air, but at the level of the intercostals and the diaphragm, they are contraction is not as almost agnostic to whether or not the nose and mouth are open. so there, if i understand correctly, there's no reason to suspect that there are particular perhaps even non overlapping sets of neurons in pre-bought singer area of the brain stem that triggered nasal versus mouth inhales. no, i would say that there's, it's not that the pre button complex is not concerned and cannot influence that, but it does not appear as if there's any modulation of whether or not it's where the air is coming from, whether it's coming through your nasal passages or through your mouth. great. thank you. and then the other question i have is that these intercostal muscles between the ribs that move the ribs up and out, if i understand correctly, and the diaphragm are those skeletal, or as the brits would say, skeletal muscles or smooth muscles, what type of muscle are we talking about here? as i said earlier, these are skeletal. i didn't say there was skeletal muscles, but they're muscles that need new orleans put in order to move. you talked about smooth muscles, they are specialized muscles like we have in the gut and in the heart. and these are muscles that are capable of actually contracting and relaxing on their own. so the heartbeats, it doesn't need neural input in order to beat it. the neural inputs modulating the strength of it and the frequency, but they beat on their own. the skeletal muscles involved in breathing are need new orleans port. now there are smooth muscles that have an influence on breathing, and these are muscles that aligning the, the airways. and so the airways have smooth muscle. and when they become activated, the smooth muscle can contract or relax. and when they contract and appropriately is when you have problems breathing like an asthma, asthma is a condition where you get inappropriate constriction of the smooth muscles of the airway. so there's no reason to think that in asthma that the pre-bought singer or these other neuronal centers in the brain that could, that activate breathing, that they are involved or causal for, for things like asthma. and as of now, i would say the preponderance of evidence is that it's not involved, but we've not really fully investigated that. thank you, sorry to break your flow. but i was terribly interested in knowing answers to those questions and you provided them. so thank you. now, remind me again, where i was in my, we were just landing in pre-bought singer and we will return to the naming of pre-bought singer because it's a wonderful and important story really that i think people should be aware of. but yeah, maybe you could march us through the brain centers that you've discovered and others have worked on as well, that control breathing pre-bought singer as well as related pictures. so we, when we discovered the pre-bought singer, we thought that it was the primary source of all rhythmic respiratory movements, both inspiration and expiration. there are a notion of a single source is like day or night. it's like, they're all coming through all of the same origin that the earth rotates and day follows night. and we thought that the pre butsu complex would be inhalation exhalation. and then in a series of experiments, we did in the early part of 2000, we discovered that there seemed to be another region which was dominant in producing expert tory movements. that is the exhalation. we had made a fundamental mistake through sin with the discovery, the pre-bought singer not taking into account that addressed expert tory muscle activity or exhalation is passive. so if that's the case, a group of neurons that might generate active expiration, that is the contract, the expert tory muscles, like the abdominal muscles of the internal intercostals are just silent. we just thought it wasn't there was coming from one place, but we got evidence that in fact, it may have been coming from another place. and following up on these experiments, we discovered that there was a second oscillator and that oscillator is involved in generating what we call active exploration. that is this active. like if i go, shh. yeah. or when you begin to exercise, you have to go and actually move that air out. this group of cells, which is silent, the dress suddenly becomes active to drive those muscles. and it appears that it's an independent oscillator when maybe you could just clarify for people what an oscillator is. okay. and an oscillator is something that goes in a cycle. so you can have a pendulum as an oscillator going back and forth. the earth is an oscillator because it goes around and stay in night. some people's moods are also lading isolating, and it depends how regular they are. you're going to have isolators that are highly regular, that are in a watch. or you can have those that are sporadic or episodic breathing is one of those oscillators that for life has to be working continuously 24 7. it starts in the late in the third trimester because it has to be working when you're born and basically works throughout life. and if it stops, if there's no intervention beyond a few minutes, it will likely be fatal. what is this a second oscillator called? well, we found that in a region around the facial nucleus. so we initially, when this region was initially identified it, we thought it was involved in sensing carbon dioxide. it was what we call essential chemo receptor. that is, we want to keep calm dockside levels, particularly in the brain at a relatively stable level, because the brain is extraordinarily sensitive to changes in ph. if there's a big shift in carbon dioxide to be a big shift in brain ph, and that'll throw your brain, if i can use the technical term out of whack. and so you want to regulate that. and the way to regulate something in the brain is you have a sensor in the brain. and others basically identified that the ventral surface of the brainstem that is the part of the brainstem that's on this side was critical for that. and then we identified a structure that we was near the trapezoid nucleus. it was not named in any of these neuroanatomical atlases. so we just picked the name out of the hat and we called it the retro trapezoid nuclear. i should clarify for people when we, when jack is saying travis, zoe doesn't mean the trapezoid muscles trapezoid refers to the shape of this nucleus. this cluster of neurons para facial makes me think that this general areas involved in something related to mouth or face, is it an area rich with neurons controlling other parts of the face, eye blinks, nose twitches, lip curls, lip smacks. if you go back in an evolutionary sense and a lot of things that are hard to figure out, begin to make sense. when you look at the evolution of the nervous system, when control of facial muscles, going back to more primitive creatures, because they had to take things in their mouth for eating. so they, we call that the f the face sort of develop the eyes where they're the mouth. is there. these nuclei, the modem that contained the motor neurons, a lot of the control systems for them develop in the immediate vicinity. so if you think about the face, there's a lot of sub nuclei around there that had various holes at various different times in evolution. and at one point in evolution, the facial muscles were probably very important in moving fluid in and out of the mouth and moving air in and out of the mouth. and so part of that, of these many different sub nuclei now seems to be in mammals to be involved in the control of expert tory muscles. but we have to remember that mammals are very special when it comes to breathing, because we're the only class of vertebrates that have a diaphragm. if you're looking in fabian's in reptiles, they don't have a diaphragm. and the way they breathe is not by actively inspiring and passively expiring. they breathe by actively expiring and passively inspiring because they don't have a powerful inspiratory muscle. and somewhere along the line, the diaphragm developed, and there are lots of theories about how it developed. i don't think it's particularly clear. there was a something that you can find in alligators and lizards that could have turned into a muscle that was a diet, the diaphragm, the most amazing thing about the diaphragm is that it's mechanically extremely efficient. and what do i mean by that? well, if you, if you look at how oxygen gets from outside the body, into the bloodstream, the critical passage is across the membrane in the lung. it's called the alveolar capillary membrane. no villus is part of the lung. and the blood runs through capillaries, which are these, the smallest tubes in the circulatory system. and at that point, oxygen can go from the airfield alveolus into the blood, which is amazing. i find that amazing, even though it's just purely mechanical, the idea that we have these little sacs in our lungs, we inhale and the air goes in and literally the oxygen can pass into the bloodstream, passes into the bloodstream. but the rate of which had passes will depend on the characteristics of the membrane, how, what the distance is between the alveolus and the blood vessel, the capillary. but the key element is the surface area, the bigger the surface area, the more oxygen that can pass through, it's entirely a passive process. there's no magic about making oxygen cohen. now, how do you get a pack, a large surface area in a small chest where you start out with one tube, which is the trachea, the trachea expands. now you have two tubes. then you have four tubes and it keeps branching. at some point, at the end of those branches, you put a little bit of a little sphere, which is an alveolus. and that determines what the surface area is going to break b. now you then have a mechanical problem. you have this surface area, you have to be able to pull it apart. so imagine you have a little square of a last akin brain. it doesn't take a lot of force to pull it apart, but now if you increase it by 50 times, you need a lot more force to pull it apart. so amphibians who were breathing, not by compressing the lungs and then just passively expanding it. weren't able to generate a lot of force. so they have relatively few branches. so if you look at the surface area that they pack in their lungs relative to their body size, it's not very impressive. whereas when you get to mammals, the amount of branching that you have is you have four to 500 million alveoli. if we were to take those four to 5 million, a hundred, hundred million, excuse me, and lay those out flat. what sort of surface area are we talking about? about 70 square meters, which is about a third, the size of a tennis court. wow. so you have a membrane inside of you, a third, the size of a tennis court that you actually have to expand every breath. and you do that without exerting much of a, you don't feel it. and that's because you have this amazing muscle, the diaphragm, which because of its positioning just by moving two thirds of an inch down is able to expand that membrane enough to move air into the lungs. now, the, the at rest, the volume of air in your lungs is about two and a half liters. do we need to convert that to quartz? no. all right. so about two and a half liters, when you take a breath, you'd taken another 500 milliliters or half a liter, that's the size, maybe a low of my fist. so you're increasing the volume by 20%, but you're, you're doing that by pulling on this 70 square meter membrane, but that's enough to bring enough fresh air into the long to nixon with the air that's already there, that the oxygen levels in your, your bloodstream goes from a partial pressure of oxygen, which is 40 millimeters of mercury to a hundred millimeters of mercury. so that's a huge increase in oxygen and that's enough to sustain normal metabolism. so we, we have this amazing mechanical advantage by having a diaphragm. do you think, i think that the, our brains are larger than that, of other mammals in part, because of the amount of oxygen that we have been able to bring into our system, i would say a key step in the ability to develop a large brain that has a continuous demand for oxygen is the diaphragm without a diaphragm. you're an amphibian and there, and, and the there's another solution to increasing oxygen uptake, which is the way birds breathe, but birds have other limitations and they still can't get brains as big as mammals have. so we, we, the, the brain utilizes maybe 20% of all the oxygen that we intake and it needs to continuously you can't, the brain doesn't want to be neglected. so this puts certain demands on breathing system. in other words, you can't shut it down for awhile, which poses other issues you're born, and you have to mature. you have the small body, you have a small lung, you have a very pliant rib cage. and now you have to develop into an adult, which has a stiffer rib cage. and so there are changes happening in your brain and your body. we're breathing. the neural control of breathing has to change on the fly. it's not like for things like vision, where you have the opportunity to sleep. and while you're sleeping, the brain is capable of doing things that are not easy to doing during wakefulness. like the construction crew comes in during sleep. breathing has been, the change in breathing has been described as trying to build an airplane. why it's fall is basically what jack is saying is that respiration science is more complex and hardworking than vision science, which is a direct job at me that some of you might've missed, but i definitely did not miss. and i appreciate that. you always take the opportunity, like a good new yorker to, to, you know, give me a good, healthy intellectual jap question related to diaphragmatic breathing versus non diaphragmatic breathing, because the way you describe it, the diaphragm is always involved. but, you know, over the years, whether it be for, you know, yoga class or a breathwork thing, or you hear online that we should be breathing with our diaphragm, that rather than lifting our rib cage, when we breathe and our chest, that it is healthier in air quotes or better somehow to have the belly expand. when we inhale, i'm not aware of any particular studies that have really examined the direct health benefits of diaphragmatic versus non diaphragmatic breathing. but if you don't mind commenting on anything you're aware of, as it relates to diaphragmatic versus non diaphragmatic breathing, whether or not people tend to be diaphragmatic breathers by default, et cetera, that would be, i think, interesting to a number of people. well, i think by default, we are obligate diaphragm breathers. i, there may be pathologies where the diaphragm is compromised and you have to use other muscles, and that's a challenge. it certainly i'd rest. other muscles can take over, but if you need to increase the ventilation, the diaphragm is very important. it would be hard to increase your ventilation, otherwise pay attention to whether or not you are breathing in a manner where your belly goes out a little bit as you inhale, because i can do it both ways, right. i can inhale, bring my belly in, or i can inhale, push my diaphragm and belly out, not the diaphragm out, but d and that's interesting, right? because it's a completely different muscle set for each each version. well, i, in the, in the context of things like breath practice, i'm a bit agnostic about the effects of some of the different patterns are breathing. clearly, some are gonna work through different mechanisms, and we can talk about that. but at certain level, for example, whether it's primarily diaphragm, where you move your abdomen or not, i am agnostic about it. i think that the changes that, that breathing induces in emotion and cognition, i have different ideas about what the influences. and i don't see that primarily as how, which particular muscles you're choosing, but that just could be my own prejudice. okay. we'll we will return to that as a general theme in a little bit. i want to ask you about sighing. one of the many great gifts that you've given us over the years is an understanding of these things that we call physiological size. could you tell us about physiological size? what's known about them, what your particular interest in them is and what they're good for? very interesting and important question. so everyone has a sense of what osi is. we certainly, when we're emotional, emotional, in some ways we're stressed, we're particularly happy. we'll take a, we'll say it turns out that we're sighing all the time. and when i would ask people who are not particularly knowledgeable that have read my papers or james, this book, or listen to your podcast, they're usually off by tortoise a magnitude about how frequently reside on the low side. in other words, they say once an hour, you know, 10 times a day, we say about every five minutes, and i would encourage anyone who finds that to be a unbelievable fact, is to lie down in a quiet room and just breathe. normally, just relax, just let go, and just pay attention to your breathing. and you'll find that every couple of minutes, you're taking a deep breath and you can stop it. you know, it, it just, it just happened now why? well, we have to go back to the long again. the long has these 500 million alveoli, and they're very tiny. they're 200 microns across. so they're really, really tiny. and you can think of them as fluid fill their fluid line. and the reason their fluid line has to do with the esoterica of the mechanics of that, it makes it a little easier to stretch them with this fluid line, which is called surfactant. and so the fact that it's important during development, that is a determining factor in the, when premature infants are born. if they have not do not have lung surfactin, that makes her much more challenging to take care of them. then after they have lung surfactin, which is sometime if i remember correctly in the late second, early third trimester, which it appears, and in case it's fluid line, now think of a balloon that you would blow up. but now before you blow it up, fill the balloon with water, squeeze all the water out. and now hold, when you squeeze all the water out, you notice the size of the balloon stick to each other. why is that? well that's because water has what's called surface tension. and when you have two surfaces of water together, they actually tend to stick to each other. now, when you try and blow that balloon up, you know that it, oh, you'll notice if you've ever done it before that the balloon is a little harder to inflate than if we're dry on the inside. why is that? because you have to overcome that surface tension. well, your alveoli have a tendency to collapse. there's 500 million in them. they're not collapsing at a very high rate, but it's a slow rate. that's not trivial. and when an alveolus collapses it no longer can receive oxygen or take carbon dioxide out. it's sort of taken out of the equation. now, if you have 500 million in lemon, you lose 10, no big deal. but if they keep collapsing, you can lose a significant part of this surface area of your lung. now, a normal breath is not enough to pop them open, but if you take a deep breath in through nose or mouth, or just increase that lung volume, cause you're just pulling on the lungs, they'll pop open every about every five minutes. and so we're doing it every five minutes in order to maintain the health of our lung in the early days of mechanical ventilation, which was used to treat polio victims who had weakness of their respiratory muscles. they be put in these big steel tubes and the way they would work is that the pressure outside the body would drop. i would put a expansion pressure on the lungs accidentally on the rib cage. the rib cage would expand and then the long would expand. and then the pressure would go back to normal. and the lung and rib cage would go back to normal. there was a, this was great for getting ventilation, but there was a relatively high mortality rate. it was a bit of a mystery. and one solution was to just give bigger breaths. i get bigger breaths and a mortality rate dropped. and it wasn't until i think it was the fifties where they realized that they didn't have to increase every breath to be big. what they needed to do is every so often they to have one big breath. so you have a couple of minutes of normal breaths, and then one big breath just mimicking the physiological size and nana mortality rate drops significantly. and if you see someone on a ventilator in the hospital, if you watch every couple of minutes, they, you see the membrane move up and down every couple of minutes, there'll be a super breath and that pops it open. so there are these mechanisms for these physiological sys. so just like with the collapse of the lungs, where you need a big pressure to pop it open, it's the same thing with the alveola you need a bigger pressure and a normal breath is not enough. so you have to take a big inhale. and when nature has done this, instead of requiring us to remember to do it, it does it automatically. and it does it about every five minutes. and one of the questions we wanted, we asked is how is this happening? why every five minutes what's, what's doing it. and we got into it through a back door, typical of the way a lot of science gets done. this is serendipitous event where you run across a paper and something clicks and you just, you know, you follow it up. sometimes you go down blind ends, but this time out to be incredibly productive. one of the guys in my lab was reading a paper about stress and during stress, lots of things happen in the body. one of which is that the hypothalamus, which is very reactive to body state releases, peptides, which are specialized molecules, which then circulate throughout the brain and body, that particular effects usually to help deal better with the stress. and one class of the peptides that are released are called bombus unrelated peptides. and you also realize because he was a breathing guy. so when you stress your sign more, so we said, alright, maybe they're related bomba. sin is relatively cheap to buy who we said, let's buy some, bombesin throw it in the brainstem. let's see what happens. and you know, they, one of the nice things about some experiments that we try to design is the fail quickly. so here we had the idea, we throw bomba sin in and the pharmacy did nothing, no, nothing lost, maybe $50 to buy the bombesin. but if it did something good, might be of some interest. so we went afternoon, he did the experiment and he comes to me. he says, i won't quote exactly what he said because the mike and need to be censored. but he said, look at this. and it was in a rat rats side by every two minutes, they're smaller than we are. and they need the sign more often this high rate from when from 20 to 30 per hour to 500 per hour, when you put bombus in, into the pre butts in a complex amazing. and the way he did that is he took a very, very fine glass needle and a nest, the thighs, a rat, and inserted that needle directly into the pre-bought super complex. so it was an internalized delivery of the peptide. it was localized to the pre-bought singer and the cywrite went through the roof. and i would add that that was an important experiment to deliver the bombus directly to that site, because one could have concluded that the injection of the bombus and increased sign, because it increased stress rather than directly increased sign amongst hundreds of other possible interpretations. so the precision here is very important, and that goes back to what i said at the very beginning, knowing where this is happening, allows you to do the proper investigations. if we didn't know where the inspiratory rhythm was originating, we've never could have done this experiment. and so then we, then we did another experiment. we said, okay, what happens if we take the cells and the pre-bent singer that are responding to the peptide? so neurons will respond to a peptide because they have specialized receptors for that peptide. and not every neuron expresses those receptors in the priebus complex. it's probably a few hundred out of thousands. so we use the technique we had used before. and this is a technique developed by doug clappy down in san diego, where you could take a peptide and conjugated with a molecule called saffron. saffron is a plant derived molecule, which is a cousin to ryson. and many of your listeners may have heard of rice and is toxic. it's very nasty. it's a single, you know, stab with an umbrella will kill you, which is a something that supposedly happened to a bulgarian diplomat by a russian operative on a bridge in london, he got stabbed and the way rice and works is it goes inside. a cell crosses the cell membrane goes inside the cell. he kills the cell. then it goes to the next cell and then the next cell, and then the next cell it's, it's extremely dangerous. in fact, it's firstly, impossible to work on in a lab in the united states. they won't let you touch it because we've worked with sapra and many times saffron is safe because it doesn't cross cell membranes. so you got an injection of saffron and won't do anything. cause it stays outside of cells. please. nobody do that. even though it doesn't cross cell membranes, please nobody injects and whether or not you are a operative or otherwise, thank you, andrew, for protecting me there. so, but what doug laughy figured out is that when a ligan binds the receptor, those when a molecule binds to its receptor, in many cases, that receptor ligand complex gets pulled inside the cell. so it goes from the membrane, the cell inside the cell. so it like, you can't go to the dance alone, but if you're coupled up, you get in the door. that's right. so when he figured out, as he put saffron to the peptide, the peptide binds to its receptor, it gets internalized. and then when it's inside the cell, saffron does the same thing, the rice, and does it kills the cell, but then it can't go into the next cell. so the only cells that get killed or the more polite term ablated are cells that express that receptor. so if you have a big conglomeration of cells, you have a few thousand and only 50 of them express gel receptor. then you inject the saffron conjugated to the ligand, to the peptide, and only those 50 cells die. so we took bombus and conjugated, the saffron inject and the pre buzzard complex of rats. and it took about a couple of days for the saffron to actually ablate cells. and what happened is that the mice started sighing less and less, excuse me. the rats started sighing less and less and less and less, and essentially stopped sighing. so your student or postdoc, was it murdered the cells. and as a consequence, the sign goes away, right? what was the consequence of eliminating sighing on the internal state or the behavior of the rats? did they, in other words, if one can't sigh generate physiological size, what is the consequence on state of mind? do you would imagine that carbon dioxide would build up more readily or to higher levels in the bloodstream and that the animals would be more stressed. that that's the kind of logical extension of the way we set it up less benign than that. when the animals got to the point where they were in the sighing, then we did not the terminus, but the presumption was that their lung function significantly deteriorated and their physiology, their whole health deteriorated significantly. and we had the sacrifice then. so i can tell you whether they were stressed or not, but their breathing got to be significantly deteriorated that we sacrificed them at that point. now we don't know whether that is specifically related to the fact they didn't saw or that it's, there was secondary damage due to the fact that some cells die. so we never determined that. now, after we did this study to be candid, it wasn't a high priority for us to get this out the door and publish it. so it stayed on the shelf. and then i got a phone call from a graduate student at stanford, kevin yankel, who starts asking me all these interesting questions about breathing, and i'm happy to answer them. but at some point it concerned me because he was working for a renowned biochemist who worked on long injure sophala fruit flies, mark. krasnow got my second store colleague. and i said, why are you asking me this? and he said, i was an undergraduate at ucla. and you gave a lecture and not in my undergraduate class. and i was curious about breathing ever since. so that's one of those things, which as a professor, you love to hear that actually is something you really affected the life of when you burst the competitor, but you had only yourself to blame. i don't look at that as a competitor. i, i think that there's enough interesting things to go on. i know some of our neuroscience colleagues say you can work in my lab, but then when you leave my lab, you've got to work on something different. no one i ever trained with said that it's so it's open field. you want to work on something, you, you hop in the mix, but there, there are people like that, neuroscientists like that, i never felt like i hear that they're breathing apparatus are disrupted. and that causes a brain dysfunction that leads to the behavior you just described. it's actually not true, but in terms of the, so i, i, the, before you, we talk about the, the beautiful story with, with jaco and kras now and fel lab. i want to just make sure that i understand. so if physiological size don't happen, basically breathing overall suffered well, that would go back to the observations in polio victims and these iron lungs where the principal deficit was, there was no hyperinflation of the lungs and they, many of them deteriorated and died. and just to stay on this one more moment before we moved to what you were about to describe, we hear often that people will overdose on drugs of various kinds because they stop breathing. so barbiturates alcohol combined with barbiturates, a common cause of death for drug users and contra-indications of drugs, and these kinds of things. you hear all the time about celebrities dying because they combined alcohol with barbiturates. is there any evidence that the size that occurred during sleep or during states of, you know, deep, deep relaxation and sedation that size recover the, the brain? because you can imagine that if the size don't happen as a consequence of some drug impact in these brain centers, that that could be one cause of basically asphyxiation and death. if you look at the progression of any mammal to death, you find that their breathing slows down a death due to quote natural causes their breathing slows down. it's we'll stop. and then they'll gasp. so we have the phrase dying gas, super large breaths. they're often described as an attempt to auto resuscitate that as you take that super deep breath and that maybe it can kickstart the engine. again, we do not know the degree to such things as gasp are really size that are particularly large. and so if you suppress the ability to gasp in an individual who is subject to an overdose, then whereas they might been able to reroute their breathing. if that's prevented, they don't get rearranged. so that is certainly a possibility, but this has not been investigated. i mean, one of the things that i'm interested in is in individuals who have diseases, which will affect prebuttal complex. and there is, there is data in parkinson's disease and multiple system atrophy, which is another form of neurodegeneration where there's loss of neurons in priebus singer. and the question is, and it also may happen in als, sometimes referred to as lou gehrig's disease and my chuck lateral sclerosis. these individuals often die during sleep. we have an idea that we have not been able to get anyone to test is that patients with parkinson's patients with mls typically breathe normally during wakefulness, the disturbances that they have in breathing is during sleep. so parkinson's patients at the end stages of the disease often have significant disturbances in their sleep pattern, but not during wakefulness. and we think that what could be happening is that the proximate cause of death is not heart failure is that they become apneic. they stopped breathing and don't resuscitate. and that resuscitation may or may not be due to an explicit suppression of size, but to an overall suppression of the whole apparatus of the <em></em> complex. got it. thank you. so yacko calls you up. so he calls us, calls me up and he's great kids, super smart. and he tells me about these, these experiments that he's doing, where keys looking in a database to try and find out what molecules are enriched in regions of the brain that are critical for breathing. so we and others have mapped out these regions in the brain stem, and he was looking at one of these databases to see what's enriched. and i said, that's great. we'd be willing to sort of share work together. he says, no, my advisor doesn't want me to do that. so i said, okay, but kevin's a great kid. and i enjoy talking to him and he's a smart guy. and you know, what i found in academia and is that the smartest people only want to hire people smarter than them. and only one in the end have the preference interact with people smarter than them. the, at the faculty who are not at the highest level and at every institution, there's a distribution there points above the mean and those below the mean those whom below the mean are very threatened by that. and i saw kevin as like a shining light and i didn't care whether he was going to out-compete me because whatever he did was going to help me in the field. so i would, i did whatever i can to help him to work with kevin. so at one point i got invited to give grand rounds in neurology at stanford. it turns out an undergraduate student who had worked with me was now head of the training program from neurologist that stanford. then he invited me. and at the end of my visit, i go to mark crowds, dentist's office. and kevin is there. and a post-doc pugley who was also working on a project, was there. and towards the end of the conversation, the mock says to me, you know, we found this one molecule, which is highly concentrated in important region for breathing. i said, oh, that's great. what is it? and he says, i can't tell you because we want to work on it. so i'm of course i'm disappointed, but i realized that the, the ethic in some areas of science or the custom in some areas of science, is that until you get a publication, you be relatively restricted in sharing the information, sharing and have a chat. when i come back, right. well, he may remember the story differently, but i said, okay. and as i'm walking out the door, i remember these experiments i described to you about bomb bisson and that was the only unusual molecule we're working. so the reason i'm rushing out the door is i have a flight to catch. so i stick my head in, i said, is this molecule related to bomba sin? and then i run off. i normally wait for them to reply. i can be up for it. mom calls me. and he says, bombesin the peptide we found is related to bombesin what does it do? and i said, i'm not telling, oh my i'm so glad i wasn't involved in this collaboration on, but, but that was sort of a teaser. cause i said, well, let's work together on this. and then we worked together as our centers, the dilemma at that point, you, yeah. so kevin yockel is spectacular, has zoned lab at ucf. and the work that i'm familiar with from kevin is, is worth mentioning now. or i'll, i'll ask you to, to mention it, which is this reciprocal relationship between brain state, where we could even say emotional state and breathing. and i'd love to get your thoughts on how breathing interacts with other things in the brain. you've beautifully described how breathing controls the lungs, the diaphragm, and the interactions between oxygen and carbon dioxide and so forth. but as we know, when we get stressed, our breathing changes when we're happy and relaxed, our breathing changes. but also if we change our breathing, we, in some sense can adjust our internal state. w what is the relationship between brain state and breathing? and if you would, because i know you have a particular love of, of one particular aspect of this, what is the relationship between brain rhythms, oscillations, if you will, and breathing. this is a topic which is really intrigued me over the past decade. i would say before that i was in my silo, just interested about how the rhythm of breathing is generated, and they really pay much attention to this other stuff. for some reason, i got interested in it, and i think it was triggered by an article in the new york times about mindfulness. now, believe it or not. although i had lived in california for 20 years at that time, i never heard of mindfulness. it's staggering, how you can be from the real world. and i googled it and there was a mindfulness institute at ucla and they were giving courses or meditation. so i said, oh, this is great because i can now see whether or not the breathing part of meditation has anything to do with the purported effects of meditation. so i signed up for the course, and as i joke to you before i had two goals. one was to see whether or not a breathing had an effect. and the other was to levitate because i grew up with all these kung fu things and all the monks could levitate when they meditated. so why not? you know, we have a model in the lab, you can't do anything interesting if you're afraid of failing. and if i fail to levitate, well, at least i try and i should tell you now i still haven't done it yet, but i haven't given up yet. i haven't given up. so i took this course in mindfulness and it became apparent to me that the breathing part was actually critical. it wasn't simply a distraction or a focus. it, you know, they could imagine move your index finger to the same effect by really believed that the breathing part was involved. now i'm not an unbiased observer. so the question is, how can i demonstrate that i didn't feel competent to do experiments in humans. and i knew would feel like a design, the right experiments in humans, but i felt maybe i can study this in rodents. so we got this idea that we want to teach rodents to meditate and you know, that's laughable, but we said, but if, but if we can, then we can actually study how this happens. so believe it or not, i was able to get a sort of a startup grant and our 21 from ncch that's the national complimentary medicine is a wonderful full institute. i should have mentioned our government puts major tax dollars toward studies of things like meditation, breath, work, supplements, herbs, acupuncture. this is i think not well-known. and it's an incredible thing that this, that our government does that. and i think it deserves a nod and more funding. i totally agree with you. i think that it's the kind of thing that many of us, including many, many scientists thinks is too woo and unsubstantiated, but we're learning more and more, you know, we used to laugh at neuroimmunology that the nervous system didn't have anything to do with the immune system and pain itself can influence your immune system. i mean, there are all these things that we're learning that we used to dismiss. and i think there's, there's real nuggets to be learned here. so they went on elim and they funded this particular project. and now i'm going to leap ahead because for free years we threw stuff up against the wall that didn't work. and recently we had a major breakthrough. we found a protocol by which we can get mice to breed slowly awake, mice debris slowly. i won't tell you normally they don't breeze slowly. no, no. isn't always whatever the normal breath is. we could slow it down by a factor of 10 and they're fine doing that. so we could do that for, we did that 30 minutes a day for four weeks. okay. like a breath practice. do they levitate? we haven't measured that yet. i would say a priority. we haven't seen them floating to the top of that cage, but we haven't weighed them. maybe they weigh less. you know, they maybe, you know, levitation is involved is graded. and so maybe if you weigh less, it's sort of a partial limitation. in any case, we then tested them. and we had control animals, mice, where we did everything the same, except the manipulation we made did not slow down their breathing. so, but they went through everything else. we then put them to a standard for air conditioning, which we did with my colleague, michael , who's one of the real gurus of fear. and we measured a standard test is to put mice in a condition where they're concerned that we receive a shock and the responses that they freeze and the measure of how fearful they are as how long they freeze. this is well validated. and it's way above my pay grade to describe the validity of the test. but it's very valid. the, the control mice had a freezing time, which was just the same as ordinary mice would have the ones that went through our protocol froze much, much less. according to michael, the degree to which they were showed less freezing was as much as if there was a major manipulation in the amygdala, which was a part of the brain. that's important in fear processing. it's a staggering change. what we have now is the grant ran out of money, the postdoc working on it left, and now we have to try and piece together everything. and, but the data is spectacular. well, i think it's, i'll just pause you for a moment there, because i think that the, you know, you're talking about a rodent study, but i think the, the benefits of doing rodent studies that you can get deep into and for people that might think, well, we've known that meditation has these benefits. why'd you need to get mechanistic science. i think that one thing that's important for people to remember is that first of all, as many people, as one might think are meditating out there or doing breath work far, far, far, far greater number of people are not right. i mean, there's a, the majority of people don't take any time to do dedicated breath work nor meditate. so whatever can incentivize people would be a wonderful. but the other thing is that it's never really been clear to me just how much meditation is required for a real effect, meaning a practical effect. people say 30 minutes a day, 20 minutes a day, once a week, twice a week, same thing with breath, work, finding minimum or effective thresholds for changing neural circuitry is what i think is the holy grail of all these practices. and that's only going to be determined by the sorts of mechanistic studies that you described. so i, this is wonderful. i, i do hope the work gets completed and we can talk about ways that we can ensure that that happens. but, but let me, let me add one thing to what you're saying, andrew, what are the issues? i think for a lot of people is that there's a placebo effect that is in humans. they can respond to something, even though the mechanism has nothing to do with what the intervention is. and so it's easy to say that the meditative responses has a big component, which is a placebo effect. my, my stump believe in the placebo effect. and so if we could show this a bonafide effect in mice, it is convincing in ways that no matter how many human experiments you did the control for the placebo effect is extremely difficult in humans in mice. it's, it's a non-issue. so i think that that in of itself would be an enormous message. excellent. and indeed, a better point, i think a 30 minute, a day meditation in these mice, if i understand correctly the meditation, we don't know what they're thinking about. right? so it's breath practice. so there, because we don't, they're presumably they're not thinking about their third eye center, lotus position, levitation, whatever it is, they're not instructed as to what to do. and if they were, they probably wouldn't do it anyway. so 30 minutes a day in which breathing is deliberately slowed or is slowed relative to their normal patterns of breathing. got it. what was the frequency of sighing during that 30 minutes cleared? i don't know yet. well, no, we have the data. we just we're analyzing that data to be determined or to be announced at some point. so, so the fear centers are altered in some way that creates a shorter fear response to a foot shock. right? what are some other examples that you were aware of from work in your laboratory or work in other laboratories for that matter about interactions between breathing and brain state or emotional state? so this gets back to our prior conversation. i sort of went off on a tangent w we need, i think we need to think separately of the effect of volitional changes in breathing on emotion versus the effect, the, the effect of brain state on breathing. so the effect the brain is that i'm breathing like when you're stressed is effect presumably originating in higher centers. if i can use that term affecting breathing, it's the reciprocal is that when you change breathing, it affects your emotional state. i think i think of those two things as different than the ultimately be tied together. so there's a landmark paper published in the fifties where they stimulated in the amygdala of cats. and depending on where they stimulated, they got profound changes in breathing. there's like every pattern of breathing could possibly imagine. he found a site in the amygdala, which could produce that. so there's clearly a powerful descending effect coming from the li the amygdala, which is a major site for processing emotion, fear, stress, and whatnot that can affect breathing. and clearly we have volitional control over breathing. so we have profound effects there. now i should say about emotional control of breathing. i need to segue into talking about locked-in syndrome. locked-in syndrome is a devastating lesion that happens in a part of the brainstem where signals that controlled muscles are transmitted. so the fibers coming from your motor cortex go down through this part of the brain brainstem, which is called the ventral ponds. and if there's a stroke there, it can damage these pathways. what happens in individuals that have locked in syndrome is they lose all volitional movement except lateral movement of the eyes. and maybe the ability to blink the reason they're able to still blink and move their eyes is that those control centers are, are rostral closer to are not interrupted. in other words, the interruption is below that they continue to breeze because the centers for breathing don't require that volitional command and any case they're below that. so they're, they're fine. so these people continue to breathe normal intelligence, but they can't move. there's a great book called the diving bell and the about a young man who had this happens to any, he describes his life and it's a real customer to human, the human condition that he's caused. this. it's a remarkable book. it's a short book. did he write the book by blinking later? he, he did it by blinking to his caretaker. it's pretty amazing. and there was a movie which i'd never seen with javier bardeen is the protagonist. but the book, i highly recommend this to anyone to read. so colleagues studying an individual had locked in syndrome and they, this patient breeds very robotically, totally consistent, very regular. they gave the patient a low oxygen mixture. the breathe ventilation went up a co2 mixture to breathe. ventilation went up. so all the regulatory apparatus for breathing was there. they asked the patient to hold his breath or to breathe faster. nothing happened just the patient recognized the command, but couldn't change it. then all of a sudden, the patient's breathing changed considerably. and they said their patient, what happened? they said, you told a joke and i laughed. and they went back. and whenever they told a joke that the patient found funny, the patient's breathing pattern changed. and you know, your breathing pattern when you laugh is you inhale. you go ha ha, ha ha. but it's also very distinctive. we have some neuroscience colleagues who will go on named who, if you heard them laugh, 50 yards away, you know exactly who they are. yeah. well, i'll, i'll name him. eric kendall for one has an inspiratory laugh. he's famous for as opposed to exactly. yeah, exactly. so then it's very stereotyped, but it's maintained. and these people lose volitional control of breathing. so there's an emotive component controlling your breathing, which has nothing to do with your mission of volitional control. and it goes down through a different pathway because it's not disrupted by this locked-in syndrome. if you look at motor control of the face, we have the volitional control of the face, but we also have motor control, emotional control of the face, which most of us can't control. so when we look at another person, we tend, we're able to read a lot about what their, their emotional state is. and that's a lot about how primates communicate humans communicate. and you have people who are good to, seavers probably used car salesman, poker players, or now poker players, you know, have tells, but many of them now where, you know, dark glasses, because a lot of that tells you blink or whatnot, pupil size, size people besides us to tell, which is an autonomic, not a s i s a m skeletal muscle function, but we have these, all these skeletal muscles, which we're controlling, which give us away. i have the, i've tried to get my imaging friends to image some of the great actors that we have in los angeles and brain imagers, brain image. yeah. i'm sorry. no, that's all right. i mean, i got brain images because i think when, when i tell you, ask you to smile, i could tell that you're not happy that you're smiling because i asked you to smile. i think we're about to crack a joke, but we're, we're all friends. so no, i'm not that that, you know, when, when you see a picture like at a birthday or whatnot and say, say cheese, you could tell that at least half of the people are not happy to saying cheese, whereas a great actor when, when they're able to dissemble and the fact that they're sad, or they're happy, you believe that they're not faking it. it's like, that's great acting. and i don't think everyone could do that. i think that the individuals are able to do that, have some connection to the parts of their motive control system, that the rest of us don't have. maybe they develop it through training and maybe not. but i think that this can be imaged. so i would like to get one of these great actors in a imager and have them go through that. and they then get a normal person and see whether or not they can emulate that. and i think you're going to find big differences in the way they control this emotive thing. so there's a mode of control of the facial muscles, i think is in large part, similar to the mode of control of breathing. so there's that a mode of control and there's that volitional control and they're different. they're different. now the, you asked me about the jaqual stuff. the actual paper had to do with a sending that the effect of breathing on emotion. what kevin found was that there was a population of neurons in the pre busing, a complex that we're always looking to, things that are projecting, ultimately the motor neurons. he found the population of cells that projected to locus cerilios mocha, sirius, excuse me, this one of those places in the brain that seemed to go everywhere to the sprinkler system. exactly, exactly. and influence mood. and, you know, you've had podcasts about this. i mean, there's a lot of stuff going on with the amoeba. so extending the lucas radius. so you get into the locus cerilios you can now spray information out throughout the entire brain. he found specific cells that projected from pre-bought singer to local cerilios and that these cells are inspirate tory modulator. now it's been known for a long time since the sixties, that if you look in the local cerilios of cats, when they're awake, you find many neurons that have respiratory modulation, no one paid much attention to him. and why, why bother not by, by the paying attention, but why would the brain by the tab, these inputs? so what kevin did with lindsey schwartz and lee leishman lowe's lab is they killed a bladed. those cells going to locus reyes from <em></em> and the animals became calmer. and their eeg levels changed in ways that are indicative, that they became calmer. okay. and as i recall, they didn't just become calmer, but they weren't really capable of high arousal states. they work on a flat, i, i don't think we really pursued that in the paper. and so we'd have to ask john <em></em> about that, but i was on the other side of my labs, so we will ask them. but, but nonetheless, that beautifully illustrates how there is a bi-directional control right. of emotion. well, no, the, the, the two, the two stories of the locked-in syndrome, plus the yak old paper shows that emotional states influenced breathing and breathing influences emotional states, which, but you mentioned inspiration, which i always call inhalation, but people will follow. no, no, that's fine. those are interchangeable. people can follow that. there's some interesting papers from nome <em></em> group and from a number of other groups that w as we inhale, or right after we inhale the brain is actually more alert and capable of storing information than during exhales, which i find incredible. but it also makes sense. i'm able to see things far better when my eyes are open than when my eyelids are closed for that matter, maybe. right. i mean, i, don't the doubt. i mean, non anonymous work is great. let me backtrack a bit because i, i want people to understand that we're talking about breathing, effecting emotional cognitive state. it's not simply coming from priebus singer. there are a lot, there are at least, well, there are several other sites. and let me sort of describe, i need to sort of go through that one is all faction. so when you're breathing normal, normal breathing, you're inhaling and exhaling. this is creating signals coming from the nasal mucosa that is going back into the olfactory bulb. that's respiratory modulating and they'll factory ball of has some profound influence and projections through many parts of the brain. so there's a signal arising from this rhythmic moving of air in and out of the nose. that's going into the brain that has contained in it, a respiratory modulation. so that signal is there. the brain doesn't have to be using it, but when it's the discriminating owner and whatnot, that's riding on a oscillation, which is respiratory related. another potential source is the vagus nerve. the vagus nerve is a major nerve, which is containing afferents from all of the viscera. efferents just being a signal as signals to signals from the viscera. it also has signals coming from the brainstem down, which are called , but it's getting major signals from the lung, from the gut. and this is going up into the brain stem. so it's, there, there are very powerful receptors in the long that are responding to the lung volume, the lungs stretch their bearers. oh, sorry. the eight, will you, we have a number of like the pao receptors of the, of this year's nobel prize. yeah. yeah. so they're responding to the expansion and relaxation and the lung. and so if you record from the vagus nerve, you'll see that there's a huge respiratory modulation due to the mechanical changes in the lung. now why that is of interest is that for some forms of refractory depression, electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve can provide tremendous relief. why this is the case still remains to be determined, but it's clear that signals in the vegas nerve, at least artificial signals in the vegas nerve can have a positive effect on reducing depression. so it's not a leap to think that under normal circumstances, that that rhythm coming in from the vegas nerve is playing a role in normal processing. okay, let me, let me continue calling the oxide and oxygen levels. no under normal circumstances, your oxygen levels are fine. and unless you go to altitude, they don't really change very much, but your co2 levels can change quite a bit with even a relatively small change in your overall breathing. that's going to change your ph level. i have a colleague alicia marette, who has working with patients who have, who are anxious and many of them hyperventilate. and as a result of the hyperventilation, their conducts high level so low. and she has developed a therapeutic treatment where she tres these people to breed slower and the breath to restore the co2 levels back to normal. and she gets relief, their anxiety. so co2 levels, which are not going to affect brain function on a breath by breath level. although it does fluctuate, breath by breath, but sort of as a continuous background can change. and if it's changed chronically, we know that highly elevated levels of co2 can produce panic attacks. and we don't know the degree to that's a w gets exacerbated by people who get, who have a panic attack. so the degree to which their ambient co2 levels are affecting their degree of this conference. well, people who are tend to be too calm, meaning that they're, they're feeling sleepy. they, they they're under breathing as opposed to over-breathing. is there any knowledge of what the status of co2 is in their system? i don't know which doesn't mean there's no knowledge, but i'm unaware of unaware, but that's blissfully unaware. i have not looked at that literature. so i don't know. and i have a feeling, i mean, most people or excuse me, most of the scientific literature around breathing in humans that i'm aware of relates to these stressed states, because they're a little bit easier to study in the lab. whereas people feeling under-stimulated or exhausted all the time. it's a, it's a complicated thing to measure. i mean, you can do it, but it's, it's not as stressful, but in terms of the, sort of the, the measures for feeling fatigue, you know, they're, they're somewhat indirect, whereas stress who we can, we can get at pulse rates in hrv and things. i imagine that these, these devices that we're all wearing will soon be able to measure well, now they can measure oxygen levels, oxygen saturation, just amazing. yeah, but oxens, you know, pretty much stay above 90% unless there's some pathology or you go to altitude, but co2 levels vary quite a bit and seal, in fact, because they vary your body is so sensitive. the control of breathing like how much you breathe per minute is determined in a very sensitive way by the co2 level. so even a small change in your co2 will have a significant effect on your ventilation. so this is another thing that not only changes the ventilation, but affects your brain state. now, another thing that could affect breathing, how breathing practice can affect your emotional state is simply the, the sending command because breathing practice involves volitional control of your breathing. and therefore this is signal it's originating somewhere in your motor cortex. that is not, of course, that's going to go down to pre-bought singer, but it's also going to send off collaterals to other places. those collaterals could obviously influence your emotional state. so we have quite a few different potential sources. none of them that are exclusive. there's an interesting paper, which shows that if you block nasal breathing, you're still see breathing related oscillations in the brain. and this is where i think the mechanism is occurring is that there are these breathing related oscillations in the brain. they are playing a role in signal processing and maybe is, should i talk a little bit about the role that oscillations may be playing in signal processing? definitely. but before you do, i, i just want to ask you a intermediate question. we've talked a lot about inhalation, inspiration and exhalation. what about breath holds, you know, in apnea, for instance, people are holding their breath, whether or not it's conscious or, or, or unconscious they're holding their breath. what's known about breath holds in terms of how it might interact with brain state or oxygen co2. and i'm particularly interested in how breath holds with lungs empty versus breath holds with lungs full might differ in terms of their impact on the brain. i'm not aware of any studies on this looking at a mechanistic level, but i find it really interesting. and even if there are no studies, i'd love it. if you care to speculate well, one of the breath practices that intrigued me is where you basically hyperventilate for a minute and then hold your breath for as long as tumo style win-loss style, or we call it in the laboratory because frankly, before to moe and before wim, there, there, it was referred to as cyclic hyperventilation. so it was basically right, followed by a breath hold and that breath will, could be done with lungs full or lungs empty. yeah. so i had a long talk with some colleagues about what they might think inline mechanisms are particularly for the breath hold. and there's certainly, i certainly envisioned that this a component with respect to the presence or absence of that rhythmicity in your cortex, which is having effect. but the other thing with the hyperventilation hypo ventilation, where the apnea is, your co2 levels are going from low to high. anytime you're holding your breath, anytime you hold your breath, okay. and those are going to have a profound influence. now i have to talk about episodic hypoxia because there's a lot of work going on. particularly with gordon mitchell dealers here, florida is doing some extraordinary work on episodic hypoxia. so in the eighties, david mil horn did some really intriguing work. if i ask you to hold your breath, excuse me. if i gave you a low oxygen mixture for a couple of minutes, your breathing level would go up. of course you wouldn't. you want to have more oxygen for air. yeah, no, he's starving for oxygen. okay. and for a couple of minutes, you'd go up. you can read some steady state level, not so hypoxic that you can't reach an equilibrium. and then i give you a roommate or again, the ventilation quickly relaxes back down to normal. if on the other hand, i gave you three minutes of hypoxia, five minutes of normoxia, three minutes of hypoxia, five minutes of normoxia three, once hypoxia, five minutes of normoxia normoxia being normal, normal, normal. their evaluation goes up down, up, down, up, down, up down. after the last episode, your breathing comes down and doesn't continue to come down, but rises again and stays up for hours. okay? this is well validated. now this was originally done alice, but in humans all the time, it seems to have profound benefit on motor function and cognitive function. in what direction, positive, positive. i've often toyed with the idea of getting a 5%, an 8% oxygen. don't do this listeners getting an 8% oxygen tank by my desk when i'm writing a grant and doing like in blue velvet and, you know, going through the, the episodic hypoxia to improve my cognitive function, cause certainly could use improvement. when i'm writing grants, you could do this without the, the low oxygen. i mean, you could do this through breath work, presumably it's hard to lower your oxygen enough. okay? we're going in the experimental studies. they typically use 8% oxygen. it's hard to hold your breath long enough. and there is another difference here that is what's happening to your co2 levels. when you hold your breath, your oxygen levels are dropping. your co2 levels are going up. when you're doing episodic hypoxia, your co2 levels are going to stay pretty normal because you're still breathing. it's just the oxygen levels are gone. unlike normal conditions, which you described before, where oxygen is relatively constant and co2 is fluctuating depending on emotional state and activity and things of that sort in episodic hypoxia co2 is relatively constant, but you're varying the oxygen level coming into the system quite a bit. i would say it's relatively, i would say co2 is relatively constant, but it's not going to go in a direction which is going to be significantly far from normal. okay. whereas when you're holding your breath, you're going to become both hypoxic and hypercapnic at the same time, we should explain to people what hypoxic and hypercapnic are because we haven't done it just the technical time for low levels of oxygen hyper, or you could hypoxic low, hyper is high. so hyperoxia or hypo capita, low co2 or high per capita, your highest levels of co2. so when you're an episodic hypoxia, if anything, you're going to become hypo, kapnick not hypercapnic. and that could have played an influence on this one example that i re i remember, and gordon will have to forgive me if i'm misquoting. this is, they had a patient who had a stroke and had weakness and ankle flection. that is, excuse me, ankle extension, to extend the ankle. and so they had the patient in a seat where they can measure ankle extension, and then they measured it. and then they expose the patient to episodic hypoxia and they measured again, the strength of the ankle extension went way up. and so gordon is looking at this, they're looking at this now for spinal cord rehab. and i imagine for all sorts of neuromuscular performance, beneficial gordon is looking in task athletic performance. we have a project which we haven't been able to, to push them to the next level to do golf. so i find golf cause you, cause you love golf. well it's, it's because it's motor performance coordination. so it's not simply running as fast as you can. it's coordination, it's concentration. it's a whole variety of things. and so the idea would be to get a group of golfers and give them a placebo control. so they don't know whether they're breathing a gas mixture, which is just normal air or <em></em> mixture. oh, then they may be able to figure it out based on their response, do it under controlled circumstances that do it into a net, measure their length of the drives, a dispersion, whatnot and see what happens. look, if we could find that this works for golfers, forget about cognitive function. we could sell this for unbelievable amounts of money. that sounds like a terrible idea, by the way, i'm not serious about selling it. i know you're joking. i maybe people should know that you are joking about that. no, i think that anything that can improve cognitive and neuromuscular performance is going to be of interest for a wide range of both pathologic states like injury, tbi, et cetera. i mean, one of the most frequent questions i get is about recovery from ch from concussion or traumatic brain injury. a lot of people think sports, they think football, i think rugby, they think hockey. but if you look at the statistics on traumatic brain injury, most of it is construction workers, car crashes, bicycle accidents. i mean it, the, the sports part of it is a tiny, tiny minuscule fraction of the total amount of traumatic brain injury out there. i think these protocols tested in the context of golf would be very interesting because of the constraints of the measures, as you mentioned, and it could be exported to a number of things i want to just try and imagine whether or not there is any kind of breathing pattern or breath work, just to be direct about it. that even partially mimics what you described in terms of episodic hypoxia. i've done a lot of tumo wim, hoff, sick, like hyperventilation type breathing before my lab studies this in humans. and what we find is that if people do cyclic hyperventilation, so for, for about a minute, then exhale, hold their breath for 15 to 60 seconds, depending on what they can do. and just keep repeating that for about five minutes. it seems to me that it at least partially mimics the state that you're talking about because afterwards people report heightened levels of alertness, lower levels of kind of triggering due to stressful events. they feel comfortable at a higher level of autonomic arousal, cognitive focus, a number of improvements that are pretty impressive that any practitioner of wim hoff or tuma will be familiar with is that pattern of breathing even can we say that it, it maps to what you're describing in some general sense? well, the, the expert in this would be good mitchell. i would say it moves in that direction, but it's not as extreme because i don't think you can get down to the levels of hypoxia that they do clinically. i know that our pals at our breath collective actually just bought a machine because you buy a machine that does this. i see. and they bought it and they're going to do their own self testing to see whether or not this has any effect on anything that they can measure. of course you have to be concerned about self-experimentation, but i, i applaud their curiosity and going after it, hyperbaric chambers here a lot nowadays about hyperbaric chambers, people are buying them and using them. and what are your thoughts on hyperbaric chambers as it relates to any of the hyper or hypo hyperbaric chambers talking about altitude? no, i don't really have much to say. i mean, your oxygen levels would probably go up a little bit and that could have a beneficial effect, but that's way outside my area. i think 20, 22 i think is going to be the year of two things i keep hearing a lot about, which is the deliberate use of high salt intake for performance, increasing blood volume, et cetera. and hyperbaric chambers seem to be catching on much in the same way that i spazz were in and saunas seemed to be right now. but anyway, a prediction we can return to at some, at some point, i want to ask you about some of the studies that i've seen out there exploring how deliberately restricting one's breathing to nasal breathing can do things like improve memory. there's a couple of papers in journal of neuroscience, which is a respectable journal in our field, one looking at olfactory memory. so that kind of made sense because you can smell things better through your nose than your mouth, unless you're some sort of, you know, elk or something that where they can, presumably they have some sense of smell in their mouth as well. but humans generally smell with their nose that wasn't terribly surprising, but there was a companion study that showed that the hippocampus and area involved in encoding memories in one form or another was more active if you will. and memory and recall was better when people learn information while nasal breathing, as opposed to mouth breathing. does that make sense from any mechanistic perspective? well, given that there are, there's a major pathway going from the olfactory system into the brain and you cut that and, and not one for many receptors in the mouth, the degree of respiratory modulation, you're going to see throughout the forebrain is going to be less with mouth breathing than those breathing. so it's certainly plausible. i, i think there is, there are a lot of experiments that need to be done to distinguish between the two that is the, the nasal component and the non nasal component of these breathing related signals. there's a tendency sometimes when you have a strong effect to be exclusive. and i think what's going on here is that there are many inputs that can have an effect that whether they're parcel that some effect this part of behavior and some effect that part of behavior remains to be investigated. there's certainly a strong olfactory component. my interest is trying to follow the central component because we know that there's a strong central component in this, in fact, there's a strong central projection to the olfactory ball. so regardless of whether or not there's any air going in and out of the nose, there's a respiratory input into the olfactory bulb, which combines with the respiratory modulated signals coming from the sensory receptors. and as long as we are poking around, forgive the pun, the nose, what about one nostril versus the other nostril? i know it sounds a little crazy to imagine, but there have been theories in a yoga traditions and others that breathing through one nostril somehow activate certain brain centers, maybe hemispherically one side of the brain versus the other or that right nostril left nostril breathing might differ in terms of the levels of alertness or calmness they produce. i am not aware of any mechanistic data on that, but if there's worthwhile out right nostril versus left nostril, breathing that you're aware of, i'd love to know. well, it certainly plausible. i don't know of any data demonstrating in except the anecdotal reports. the, as you know, the brain is highly lateralized and we have, you know, speech on one side and, you know, a dominant hand this on one side. and so the notion that if you, you have this huge signal coming from the olfactory system and it, the some degree is spiralized is not perfectly symmetrical. that is one side is not going evenly to both sides. then you can imagine once the signal gets distributed in a way that's not uniform that the effectiveness or the response is going to be particular to the cortex in which either the signal still remains or the signal is removed from, i see what are some of the other features of our brain and body be it blinking or eye movements or ability to encode sounds or any features of the way that we function and move and perceive things that are coordinated with breathing in some interesting way. thank you for that question. almost everything. so we have, for example, on the autonomic side, we have respiratory sinus arrhythmia that is th during expiration, the heart slows down your pupils, oscillate with the respiratory cycle. i don't know what the functional basis for that is, but they do oscillate with the respiratory side when we inhale our peoples constrict, presumably, cause there's an increase in heart rate and sympathetic tone, i would think of constriction. and i'm guessing as you relax, the pupil will get and you xml, i will take your right, but i always get, i always get the available. yeah, well, it's, it's counterintuitive because people wouldn't think that when the pupils get, i mean, it depends. i mean, well, you can get very alert and aroused in that for stress or for good reasons and the peoples get wider, but your visual field narrows and then the opposite is true. anyway, i th i guess the idea is that the pupils are changing size and therefore the aperture, your visual window is changing in, in coordination with breathing, your fear response changes with the respiratory cycle. can you tell us more about that? well, it was a paper by solano, which i think showed rather clearly that if you show individuals fearful faces, that there re measured response of fearfulness changes between inspiration expiration. you know, i don't know why, but it does your, your reaction time change. so you talk about blinking the reaction time changes between inspiration, expiration you're. if i asked you to punch something that time will change between inspiration and expiration. in fact, i don't know the degree to which martial artists exploit that, you know, you watch the breathing pattern and your, your opponent will actually move slower during one cycle competitor, meaning as there w in which direction, if they're exhaling, they can, they can punch faster. i have to say, i, i don't keep a table of which witches, which direction things move in because i'm out of the martial arts field. i vague understanding is that exhales on strikes is the more typical way to, to do that. and so, as people strike, they exhale in march. you, you exhale, but th there, there are other components to strike. and because you want to stiffen your, your rib cage, you want to make a valsalva maneuver. so that's, you know, both an inspiration and expiration it's at the same time. so i don't, i, i don't, i don't know enough about when you say during expiration, i would assume that when you make your strike, you're actually sort of wanting to stiffen here, which is a valsalva maneuver. and oftentimes they'll clench their fist at the last moment, because anyway, there's a whole set of motor things there that wait, we should, we can talk to some fighters, sweden. we know people who know fighters. so what we can ask them, interesting. what are some other things that are modulated by breathing? okay. you know, it, i think anything, anyone looks at seems to have a breathing component because it's all over your brain, and it's hard to imagine it not being effective now, whether it's incidental or just background, and doesn't really have any behavioral advantage as possible. and other cases, it might have a behavioral advantage. i mean, the, the, the big, this eye-opening thing for me probably a decade ago, was digging into literature and, and seeing how much of cortical activity and subcortical activity had a respiratory modulator component to it. and i think a lot of my colleagues who were studying cortex are oblivious to this, and they find, i heard a talk the other day from personal going name, who find a lot of things correlated with a particular movement. and i think it all, when i looked, i said, gee, that's the list of things that are respiratory modulator. and rather than it being correlated to the movement that we're looking at, i think the movement they were looking at was modulator by breathing as was everything else. so there wasn't that the movement itself was driving that correlation. it was that they were all correlated to something else, which is the breathing movement and whether or not that is a behaviorally relevant, or behaviourally something you can exploit. i don't know. i suspect to your right, that breathing is if not the foundational driver of many, if not all of these things that it's at least one of the foundation's it's in the background, it's in the brain. and i oscillations play an important part in brain function. and they very infrequency from maybe a hundred hertz down to where we can get the circadian and, you know, sort of monthly cycles, but breathing occupies a rather unusual place and all that, because, so let me talk about what the people think escalations are doing particular festa ones here are important in coordinating signals across neurons, just like in a computer, a computer steps. so a computer knows when information is coming from another part of a computer so that it was originated at a particular time. and so that the screen step-by-step thing is important in computer control. now, the brain is not a digital device, it's an analog device, but when i have a signal that coming in my ear and my eye, which is angela, you've been speaking and i'm looking at his face, i see that as a whole, but the signal is coming into different parts of my brain. how do i unify that? well, my neurons are very sensitive to changes in signals, arriving by fractions of a millisecond. so i know we're sure that those signals coming in represent the same signal. well, if i have throughout my brain and isolation and the signals right on that oscillation, let's say the peak of the oscillation, i can then have a much better handle on the road of timing and say, those two signals came in at the same time. they may relate to the same object and a ha i see you as when unify thing spouting talking. and so these oscillations come in many different frequency, ranges and are important in memory formation and all sorts of things. i don't think people pay much attention to breathing because it's relatively slow to, to this the range, when you think about milliseconds, but we have important things that are thought to be important in cognitive function, which are a few cycles per second to 20 30, 40 50 cycles per second, breathing in humans is maybe 0.2 cycles per second, every five seconds. although in romans, they're up to four per second, which is pretty fast. so, but breathing has one thing which is special. that is you can readily change it. so the degree to which the brain is using that slow signal for anything, if that becomes part of its normal signal processing, you now change it. that signal processing has to change. and as that signal processing changes acutely, there's a change. so, you know, you asked about breath practice, how long do you have to do it? well, a single breath will change your state. you know, you're nervous. he had taken a deep breath and it seems to help relax. so you're going to call it what you will call it, what you will. it seems to work now. it's not, it doesn't have a permanent change, but you know what? i'm getting up to bat or getting up to the first tee or getting to give a big talk or coming to do a podcast. i get a little bit anxious, a deep breath, or a few deep breaths are tremendously effective in calming one down. and so you can get a transient disruption, but on the other hand, let's take something like depression. i think it's, you can envision depression as activity sort of going around in a circuit. and because it's continuous in the nervous system, as signals keep repeating, they tend to get stronger and they can get so strong. you can't break them. so you can imagine the pression being a s something going on and on and on, and you can't break it. and so we have trouble when we get for certain levels of depression. i mean, all of us get depressed at some point, but if it's not continuous, it's not one last thing. we're able to break it. but if it's long lasting and very deep, we can't break it. so the question is, how do we break it? well, there are extreme measures to break it. we could do electroconvulsive shock. we shot the whole brain. that's disrupting activity in the whole brain. and when this circuit starts to get back together again, it's been disruptive. and we know that the brain, when signals get disrupted a little bit, we can weaken the connections and weakening the connections. if it said in this circuit evolved in depression, we may get some relief and electroconvulsive shock shock does work for relieving, many kinds of depression. that's pretty heroic, focal, deep brain stimulation does the same thing, but more localized or transcranial stimulation. you're disrupting a network. and while it's getting back together, it may weaken some of the connections. if breathing is playing some role in this circuit. and now, instead of doing like a, you know, one second shock, i do 30 minutes of disruption by doing slow breathing or other breathing practice. the does circuits begin to break down a little bit and i get some relief. and if i continue to do it before the circuit can then build back up again, i gradually can wear that circuit down. i, i sorta like in this, i tell people it's like walking around on a dirt path. you build a rut to rut, get so deep. you can't get out of it. and what breathing is doing is sort of filling in the right bit by bed to the point that you can climb out of that rut. and that is because breathing the breathing signal is playing some role in the way the circuit works. and then when you disrupt it, the circuit gets a low thrown off kilter. and when, as you know, when this, when circuits get thrown off to nervous system tries to adjust in some way or another. and it turns out at least for breathing for some evolutionary reason, or just by happenstance, it seems to improve our emotional function, our cognitive function. and, you know, we're very fortunate that that's the case. it's a terrific segue into what i want to ask you next. and this is part of a set of questions i want to make sure we touch on before we wrap up, which is what do you do with all this knowledge in terms of a breathing practice? you mentioned that one breath can shift your brain state and that itself can be powerful. i think that's absolutely true. you've also talked about 30 minute breath, prac breath word practices, which is three minutes of breath work. is it pretty serious commitment? i think, but it's doable, certainly a zero cost, except for the time, for in most cases, what do you see out there in the landscape of breath work that's being done that you like, and why do you like it? what do you think you, or what would you like to see more of in terms of exploration of breath work and what do you do? well, i'm a re well of the new convert to breathwork through my own investigation of, of it. i became convinced that it's real and basically a beginner in terms of my own practice. and i like to keep things simple. and i think i've discussed this before. i liken it to someone who's a couch potato who was told they gotta begin to exercise. you don't go out and run a, so, you know, couch potato, you say, okay, get up and walk for five minutes and 10 minutes. and then, okay, now you're walking for a longer period. you'll begin to run. and then you reach a point. you say, well, gee, i'm interested in this sport. and there may be particular kinds of practices that you can use that could be helpful in, in optimizing performance at that sport. i'm not there yet. i find i get tremendous benefit by rolling really short periods between five and maybe 20 minutes of doing box breathing. it's very simple to do. i have a simple app, which helps me keep the timing. do you recall what's happened? is, is it the apnea trainer? is that the one? well, i was using calm for a long time, but i let my subscription relapse and i have another one whose name i don't remember, but it it's. so it's very simple and it works for me now trying this to mole because i'm just curious and exploring it because it may be acting for a different way. and i want to see if i re i respond differently. so i, i don't have a particular point of view. now i have friends and colleagues or into, you know, particular styles like wim hoff. and i think what he's doing is great and getting people who are interested, i think the notion is that i would like to see more people exploring this. and to some degree, as you point out 30 minutes a day, some of the breath patterns that some of these thoughts, like wim hoff are a little intimidating to new ps. and so i would like to see something very simple, that what i tell my friends is, look, just try it five to 10 minutes. see if you feel better, do it for a few days. if you don't like it, stop it, it doesn't cost anything. and invariably, they find that it's helpful. i well often interrupt my day to take five or 10 minutes. like if i find that i'm lagging, you know, there's, i think there's some pretty good data that your performance after lunch declines. and so very often what i'll do after lunch, which i didn't do today is take five or 10 minutes and just sort of breath practice. and lately, what that, what does that breath practice look like? it's just box breathing for five 10. and you're the duration of your inhales and holds and exhales and holds is set by the app. is that right? well, i do five seconds. so five seconds inhale five second, hold five seconds. exhale, 5, 5, 6, and sometimes i'll do doubles. i'll do 10 seconds just because i, i, i get bored, you know, it's just, i feel like doing it and it's, it's, it's very, it's very helpful. i mean, now that's not the only thing i do with respect to trying to maintain my sanity and my health. i can imagine that it could be a number of things, although you seem, because you seem very sane and very healthy. i in fact, know that you are both of those things. you're suspect, i suspect, but there's data a while back, we had a conversation, a casual conversation, but you said something that really stuck in my mind, which is that it might be that the specific pattern of breath work, that one does is not as important as experiencing transitions between states based on deliberate breath work or something to that extent, which i interpreted to mean that if i were to do box breathing with five seconds in five seconds, hold five seconds, exhale, five second, hold for a couple of days, or maybe even a couple of minutes and then switch to a 10 seconds or then switch to tumo that there's something powerful perhaps in the, in the transitions and realizing the relationship between different patterns of breathing in those transitions, much in the same way that you can get onto into one of these cars in an amusement park that just goes at a constant rate and then stops very different than learning how to shift gears. you know, i used to drive a manual. i still cancer. i'm thinking about a manual transmission, but even with an automatic transmission, you start to get a sense of how the vehicle behaves under different conditions. and i thought that was a beautiful seed for a potential breath work practice. that at least to my awareness, nobody has really formalized, which is that you introduce some variability within the practice. that's somewhat random in order to be able to sense the relationship between different speeds and depths of inhales exhales and holds and so forth. and essentially it's like driving around the track, but with obstacles at different rates and breaking and restarting and things of that sort, that's how you learn how to drive. what do you think about that? and if you like it enough, can we call it the feldman protocol please? no. i was asked in this bbc interview once white and i named it the feldman complex. so that priebus who accomplished that already have a feldman complex, well, it sounds like a psychiatric disorder, but, but i think the primary effect is this disruptive effect, which i described. and, but the particular responses may clearly vary depending on what that disruption is. i don't know of any particular data, which are as in well controlled experiments, which can actually work through the different types of breathing patterns or simply with a box pattern, just varying the durations. i mean, pri yama is sort of similar, but the amount of time you spend going around the box is different. so don't really have much to say about this. i mean, this is why we need better controlled experiments in humans. and i think this is where being able to study and in rodents where you can have a wide range of perturbations while you're doing more invasive studies to really get down as to which regions are affected, how has the signal processing disrupted, which is still a hypothesis, but how it's disrupted could tell us a lot about, you know, maybe there's a resonant point at which this an optimal effect when you take a particular breathing practice. and then when we talked about, you know, the fact that different breathing practices could be affecting the outcomes through different pathways, you know, you have the olfactory pathway, you have a central pathway, you have a vagal pathway, you have a descending pathway, how different practices may change the, the summation of those things. because i think all those things are probably involved and we're just beginning to scratch the surface. and i just hope that we can get serious neuroscientists and psychologists to do the right experiments to get at this, because i think there's a lot of value to human health here. i do too. and it's one of the reasons my lab has shifted to these sorts of things in humans. i'm delighted that you're continuing to do the hardcore mechanistic work in mice and probably do work in humans already as well, if you're not already. and there are other groups, epl lab at ucf, and a number of i'm starting to see some papers out there about respiration in humans, a little bit, some more brain imaging. i can't help but ask about a somewhat unrelated topic, but it is important in light of this conversation because you're here. and one of the things that i really enjoy about conversations with you as it relates to health and neuroscience and, and so forth is that, you know, you're one of the few colleagues i have who openly admits to exploring supplementation. i'm a long time supplement fan. i think there there's power in compounds, both prescription non-prescription natural synthesized. i don't use these haphazardly, but i think there are certainly power in them. and one of the places where you and i converge in terms of our interest in the nervous system and supplementation is vis-a-vis magnesium. now i've talked at, you know, endlessly on the podcast and elsewhere about magnesium for sake of sleep and improving transit transitions to sleep and so forth. but you have a somewhat different interest in magnesium that as it relates to cognitive function and durability of cognitive function, would you mind your sharing with us a little bit about what that interest is, where, where it stems from and because it's this because it's the human lab podcast, and we often talk about supplementation, what, what you do with that information. i need to disclose. i am a scientific advisor to a company called neuro century, which my graduate student kosong lewis ceo. so that said, i can give you some background song. although when he was in my lab, work done breathing had a deep interest in learning and memory. and we left my lab. he went to work for it with a renown learning, a memory guy at stanford diction. and when he finished there, he was hired by system tonegawa at mit and also knows a thing or two about memory i'm teasing. so sumo has a nobel for his work on immunoglobulins, but then as a world-class memory researcher. yeah. and more he's many things. and, and well, sung had very curious, very bright guy. and he was interested in how signals between neurons get strengthened, which is called long-term potentiation or ltp. and one of the questions that arose was if i have inputs to a neuron and i get ltp, is the ltp bigger? if the signal is bigger or the noise is less. so we can imagine that when we're listening to something, if it's louder, we can hear it better. or if there's less noise, we can hear it better and you want it to investigate this. so i did this and tissue culture of hipaa hippocampus neurons. and what he found was that if he lowered the background activity and all of the neurons, that the ltp he elicited got stronger, and the way he did that was increasing the level of magnesium and the bathing solution. this gets into some esoteric electrophysiology, but basically there's a background level of noise and all neurons. and that part of it is regulated by the degree of magnesium and the extracellular bath. and you mean x you mean electrical noise, electrical noise. i'm sorry. and if you include in, what's called a physiological range, which is between 0.8 and 1.2 millimolar, which don't worry about the number. i remember the millimolar of the magnesium. i'm always frightened that i get, you know, i say micro or femto or something. i go off by several orders of, but so in that physiological range, there's a big difference in the amount of noise in the neuron between point a and 1.2 million. so key played around with the magnesium, many found out that when the magnesium was elevated, it was more ltp, right? that's an observation in a tissue culture, right? you mentioned that more ltp essentially translates to more. neuro-plasticity more rewiring of connections in essence. so he tested this in mice and basically offered them a, he had control mice, which got a normal diet and one that had one, the rich, the magnesium, and the ones that lived in richwood, magnesium had higher cognitive function live longer. everything you'd want in some magic pill, those mice did that. excuse me, rats. the problem was that you couldn't imagine taking this into humans because most magnesium salts don't passively get from the gut into the bloodstream, into the brain. they pass by a what's called a transporter transport or something in a membrane that grabs a magnesium molecule or atom and pulls it into the other side. so if you imagine you have magnesium in your gut, you have transporters that pull the magnesium in the gut, into the bloodstream. well, if you had to take a normal magnesium supplement that you can buy at the pharmacy, it doesn't cross the gut for easily. and if you would take enough of it to get it in your bloodstream, you start getting diarrhea. so it's not a good way to go, but it is a good way to go. i couldn't help myself well said. so he worked with this brilliant chemist, female and fe looked at a whole range of magnesium compounds and he found the magnesium three and eight was much more effective in crossing the, the god blood barrier. now they didn't realize at the time, but three and eight is a metabolite of vitamin c and there's a lots of three night in your body. so magnesium three nate would appear to be safe and maybe part of the role or the now they believe it's part. the role of the three and eight is that it's supercharges the transporter to get the nineties human. and remember you need a transporter at the gut, into the brain and into cells. so they gave magnesium three to mice who had no, let me backtrack a bit. they did a study in humans. they hired a, a company to do a test that was a hands-off test. it's one of these companies that gets hired by the big pharma to do their test for them. and they got patients who had, were diagnosed as mild cognitive decline. these are people who had cognitive disorder, which was age inappropriate. and then the metric that they use for a determining how far off they were is spearman's g factor, which is a ma generalized measure of intelligence that most psychologists except, and the biological age of the subjects was i think 51 and the cognitive age was 61 based on this spam. and geez, i should say the spam and g factor starts at a particular popular level in the population at age 20 and declines about 1% a year. so sorry to say, we're not 20 year olds anymore, but when you get a number from that, you can put on the curve and see whether your it's about your age and that these people were about 10 years older. according to that metric and long story short after three months, this is a bus cbo controlled double blind study. the people who were in the placebo arm improved two years, which is common for human studies, because a placebo effect, the people who got the compound improved eight years on average, and some improved more than eight years, they didn't do any further diagnosis as to what caused the monocot from the client. but it was pretty, it was extraordinarily impressive. so it moved their cognition closer to their biological age, biological age. do you recall what the doses of magnesium threonate it's in the paper and it's basically what they have in the compound, which is sold commercially. so the compound, which has sold commercially is handled by a nutraceutical wholesaler who sells it to the retailers and they make whatever formulation they want. but it's, it's a dosage, which is my understanding is rarely tolerable. i take half a dose. the reason i take half a dose is that i had my magnesium blood magnesium measured, and it was low normal for my age. i took half a dollar, so it became high normal, and i felt comfortable staying in the normal range, but you know, a lot of people are taking the full dose and, and at my age, i'm not looking to get smarter. i'm looking to decline more slowly. and it's hard as you know, it's hard for me to tell you whether or not it's effective or not. you remembered the millimolar of the magnesium in the solution and on the high end, low end. so i would say it's not a well controlled study and it's an n of one, but it seems to be working when i, when i've recommended it to my friends, academics who are not by nature, skeptical, if not cynical and insist that they try it, they usually don't report a major change in their cognitive function. or though sometimes they do report. well, i feel a little bit more alert than my new, my physical movements are better, but many of them report their sleep better. and, and that makes sense. i think there's good evidence that three and eight can accelerate the transition into sleep and maybe even access to deeper modes of sleep. for some people there, for many people, actually a small percentage of people who take three and eight, including one of our podcast staff here have stomach issues with it. they can't tolerate it. i would say just anecdotally, about 5% of people don't tolerate three and eight. well, you stopped taking it and then they're fine. it caused them diarrhea or something of that sort, but most people tolerate it well. and most people report that it vastly improves their sleep. and again, that's anecdotally, there are a few studies and they're more on the way, but this that's very interesting because i, until you and i had the discussion about three and eight, i wasn't aware of the cognitive enhancing effects, but the story makes sense from a mechanistic perspective. and it brings it around to a bigger and more important statement, which is that i so appreciate your attention to mechanism. i guess this stems from your early training as a physicist and the desire to get numbers and, and to really parse things at a fine level. so we've covered a lot today. i know there's much more that we could cover. i'm going to insist on a part two at some point, but i really want to speak on behalf of a huge number of people. and just thank you, not just for your time and energy and attention to detail and accuracy and clarity around this topic today. but also what i should've said at the beginning, which is that, you know, you really are a pioneer in this field of studying respiration and the mechanisms underlying respiration with modern tools for now for many decades, you know, and the field of neuroscience was one that was perfectly content to address issues like memory and vision and, you know, sensation perception, et cetera. but the, the respiratory system was overlooked for a long time as, and you've just been steadily clipping away and clipping away and much cause of the events of, of related to covid and a number of other things, and this huge interest in breathwork and brain states and wellness, the field of respiration and interest and respiration has just exploded. so i really want to extend a sincere thanks. it means a lot to me. and i know to the audience of this podcast, as someone with your depth and rigor in this area is both a scientist and a practitioner, and that you would share this with us. so thank you. i want to thank you. this is actually a great opportunity for me. i've been isolated in my silo for a long time, and it's been a wonderful experience to communicate to people outside the silo, have an interest in this. and i think that there's a lot that remains to be done. and i enjoy speaking to people who have interest in this. i find the interest to be quite the mind-boggling and it's quite wonderful that people are willing to listen to things that can be quite esoteric at times, but it gets down to deep things about who we are and how we are going to live our lives. so i appreciate the opportunity and i would be delighted to come back at any time. wonderful. we will absolutely do it. thanks again, jack. i know. thank you for joining me for my conversation with dr. jack feldman. i hope you found it as entertaining and as informative as i did. if you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to us on youtube. that's a terrific zero cost way to support us. in addition, please subscribe to the podcast on spotify and apple and on apple, you can leave us a review and you can leave us up to a five-star rating. please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of the podcast, that's the best way to support this podcast. we also have a patrion it's patrion.com/andrew huberman. and there you can support the huberman lab podcast at any level that you like. in addition, if you're not already following us on instagram and twitter, i teach neuroscience on instagram and twitter. some of that information covers information covered on the podcast. some of that information is unique information, and that includes science and science-based tools that you can apply in everyday life so i want to thank you once again for joining me for my conversation with dr. jack feldman and last, but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science.