thank you. thanks for having me. huberman thank you for joining me for today's discussion with david goggins. to learn more about david and to find links to his two fantastic books, can't hurt me and never finished. please see the show note captions. if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our youtube channel. that's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. in addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both spotify and apple and on both spotify and apple. you can leave us up to a five star review. please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. that's the best way to support this podcast. if you have questions or comments about the huberman lab podcast or if you have suggestions about guests or topics that you'd like me to cover, please put those in the comment section on youtube. huberman i do read all the comments, momentous (ad) huberman not on today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the huberman lab podcast, we discuss supplements. while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep, for hormone support and for focus. if you'd like to learn more about the supplements discussed on the huberman lab podcast, please go to live momentous spelled ous. so that's live momentous dot com slash huberman. huberman if you're not already following me on social media, i am huberman lab on all social media platforms. so that's instagram, twitter, threads x, linkedin, and facebook. and on all those platforms, i discuss science and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the huberman lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content on the huberman lab podcast. so again, it's huberman lab on all social media platforms. if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter, i encourage you to do so. it is completely zero cost and it provides podcast summaries and protocols in the form of brief pdfs of one to three pages. things like deliberate cold exposure, protocol for foundational fitness, protocol for deliberate heat exposure, for managing dopamine, for optimizing your sleep, and so on and so on. huberman again, completely zero cost. you simply go to huberman lab dot com, go to the menu, scroll down to newsletter, and click on the newsletter tab and you enter your email to sign up. but i should point out that we do not share your email with anybody. thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with the one and only david goggins. and last, but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.