welcome to the huberman lab podcast, where we discuss science and science based tools for everyday life. i'm andrew huberman and i'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at stanford school of medicine. my guest today is dr. peter attia. dr. peter attia is a medical doctor who did his training at stanford university school of medicine and johns hopkins school of medicine. dr. atia is one of the world's most trusted voices on the topics of healthspan and lifespan, and with good reason. he is known to systematically review the research literature, the clinical trials, and he maintains an avid clinical practice. so when it comes to the topic of whether or not a particular molecule or supplement or prescription drug is indeed something that we should be thinking about and perhaps even taking in order to improve our health span and lifespan, dr. atiya is the person that i choose to sit down with and discuss it. so today we are going to discuss the so-called nad pathway. this is a pathway that's received a lot of attention in recent years as a potential target for improving lifespan that is for living longer. today, we discuss the various molecules in this pathway and the various approaches to increasing nad, which is the n target goal of anyone that's trying to augment the nad pathway, so to speak. so for instance, we talk about taking and nr versus nmn versus direct infusions, or even orally taking nad. and we compare them in terms of both what's known and what is not known about their ability to get into cells and any efficacy they may have for either longevity or health span. dr. att and i compare and contrast the literature on this, again, both research and clinical literature, and we discuss whether or not he or i take nad, nmn or and nr, and if so, or if not the reasons for that. we also each go through our own supplement regimen, which of course reflects what we do believe can potentially have an effect on healthspan and or lifespan. so by the end of today's episode, you'll learn a lot about nad. you'll learn a lot about the biological pathway. you'll learn a lot about the delivery routes, the various supplements, and why people think they may be useful, why others, perhaps even dr. atiya and myself think they may not be useful for longevity. you'll have to listen to find out what the answer is there. i should also mention that we give somewhat of an overview or a framework for thinking about approaches to longevity. so if you're interested in things like rapamycin, metformin, and whether or not fasting can improve longevity, we get into that as well. before we begin, i'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at stanford. it is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. in keeping with that theme, i'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. and now for my discussion about nad and longevity with dr. peter attia, peter attia, welcome, how are you? great to see you again. great to be here again. should we parse this nad thing? i think we should. do you mind if i set up a little bit of a framework? great. so for people that want to live as long as possible, i figure there are at least four categories of approaches, broadly speaking. the first, i'll just call the do's and don'ts. you've talked a lot about these. your book outlive beautifully covered these, and i tend to regurgitate some of what you say on this podcast. namely, you wanna move appropriately and often enough. so get enough zone two cardio. do your resistance training. keep nerve to muscle connection strong. avoid the sorts of things that would lead to falling and being immobile. eat right. there's a whole category of things there we're not gonna talk about today, although we might touch on a bit and know your genetics and make some good decisions on the basis of your genetics. so the do's and don'ts, the second category i would put under the umbrella of calories, glucose, insulin, et cetera, that all kind of funnel in, at least in my mind, to mtor, mammalian target of rapamycin, a molecule that's robustly expressed during development, and essentially all cells of the body. and then across the lifespan, tapers off during puberty especially, well, let's say infancy through puberty, cells are expressing so much mtor and they're growing like crazy. and we often associate that early stage of life as youth, not aging, because we think of it as a, a kind of a timestamp as opposed to the verb. but i would argue as a developmental neurobiologist by training that it's one of the most rapid phases of aging, of our entire lifespan. look at a picture of you when you were five. look at a picture of you when you were eight versus 15. you look very different, and your size is robustly different. by the way, i just did this exercise 'cause my daughter, her birth, her 16th birthday is around the corner and we take a picture of her every single year at the minute of her birth. so we have a picture of her every single year holding a clock that says 3 56 at 3:56 pm because that's when she was born. and i just went through and pulled each of the last 16 of them from the day she was born all the way up. and you're right, the biggest changes are actually in about the first 10 years. you know, the difference between being 13 and 14, 14 and 15, 15 and 16 becomes incrementally less and less and less. whereas going from two to three and three to four and four to five are ridiculous changes. yeah, i mean, the brain, the same brain has to learn an entirely new body every year in terms of how to move it, limb length, et cetera. so a lot of the, so-called anti-aging or longevity approaches that fall under this umbrella relate to things like caloric restriction or taking drugs such as rapamycin. and of course, mammalian target of rapamycin is the target of rapamycin. duh. in an effort to essentially remove excess insulin, blood glucose and thereby reduce mtor activity. so essentially slow cellular growth. and all that fits nicely into the logic that mtor is associated, not just with development, but with aging because development is aging. and then i would say there's a third category, and it's the one we are going to talk about today, which is targeting specific cellular pathways that some people have deemed potentially interesting for longevity. and the pathway that we're going to spend some time on is the, so-called nad pathway, and nr nmn, nad being the major players. and we'll talk about some of the biochemical and enzymatic steps in between. and then i suppose there's a fourth category, which we could say is, you know, the do everything, even the most esoteric of things category, this is a rare category. there are folks like brian johnson who spend a lot of time in this category specifically, you know, taking very high doses of polyphenols, limiting their caloric intake to just early part of the day. i think he eats dinner at 11:00 am i don't know if it still qualifies as dinner at 11:00 am but his final bite of calories is, i believe at 11:00 am doing everything from red light to pr ppl, platelet, platelet rich plasma, excuse me, and essentially the kitchen sink approach to longevity and aging. did i miss any categories? so i i, i would frame it slightly differently because i, i like categories to be more mey, mutually exclusive, collectively exhaustive. so, so i, i don't, i don't know that i would formulate it that way, right? i might say, look, category one are sort of the essential behavioral things that you have no choice but to engage in whether you want to or not, right? so you have to eat, you have to sleep, you have to move, you just have a choice in do you wanna do those things correctly or not correctly? or do you wanna do those things in a manner that promotes health or erodes health, right? so again, there's nobody listening to us who doesn't eat. but again, you can choose how much you eat and what you eat. and when you eat, there's nobody who's alive who isn't moving because locomotion is life, and the absence of life is the absence of locomotion. but you can certainly choose to move very little. you can choose to move a lot, and you can choose to decide on how you move. you alluded to it already, right? you can, you can move in a certain way that puts your aerobic system in a zone that maximizes fat oxidation. we call that zone two. you can move at a level where you consume incredible amounts of oxygen at your maximum aerobic level. you can choose to move in a manner that uses resistance and, and gravity against you and all those sorts of things. similarly, we all have to sleep, right? matt walker would probably tell us the number of days you could go with sleep without sleep before you would literally perish. but again, you have a lot of choices in how you do it. so anyway, i agree that's kind of category one, but that's kinda the way i would frame it. and then i would put in category two, sort of what are the molecules that you would exogenously take to try to impact any of those systems? and maybe, and again, i'm not saying my framework is correct and yours isn't. i'm just saying, this is the way i think about it. i would then say, what are the molecules that i could take that specifically target disease processes? so i kind of think of like, if you want to live longer, and i described this i think in chapter four of outlive, there's a, that's a, that turns out to be mathematically equivalent in the modern society to delaying the onset of chronic disease. now, that wasn't true a hundred years ago. a hundred years ago, if you wanted to live longer, a few things had to be true. you couldn't die during childbirth and that 'cause that was a huge hit on mortality. and then you had to not get an infection or succumb to trauma. and, and then maybe 150 years ago that was the case. but today, most of those things are taken care of by antibiotics, sanitation, and, you know, the modern miracle of childbirth in the, in, in, in this era. so now for you and i to live longer, we basically have to delay the onset of cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, cancer, neurodegenerative disease, dementing diseases, and metabolic diseases. we have to delay the onset of those things. the longer we delay the onset, the longer we will live full stop. so you can use everything that you talked about in the first category plays into that. but you also have this other category of where you can take molecules that specifically target those things. you can take metformin or an sglt two inhibitor or a glp one agonist, and you will directly impact those things. you could take a pcsk nine inhibitor or a statin or bemed doic acid, you will directly impact those disease processes. you will delay the onset of those diseases and you will reduce the mortality associated with them. then i'm gonna go to a third category that says, are there exogenous molecules that you can take that don't target a disease per se specifically, but we're gonna put them in a category called zero protective, which is they target hallmarks and pathways of aging that you've described. so we talk about all of these things that occur in an aging phenotype where we see more inflammation, we see a greater abundance of senescent cells, we see reduced nutrient sensing capacity of mtor, which you describe as the probably the most important nutrient sensing system in our body. so, so we have, you know, these, somewhere between nine and 14. the number just keeps changing arbitrarily, but it doesn't really matter. we have these central things that everybody would agree, define what an aging phenotype is, and can we use exogenous molecules to target those specifically. you gave one example, which i, i would argue is the single best example, which is rapamycin. so rapamycin targets a very specific hallmark of aging, and we can talk about what the experimental evidence is to suggest that that makes you live longer. so i would sort of say those are the big three categories. and then basically the fourth category you could just say is like, how do you put them all together and how aggressive do you want to be in culminating those? of course, none of this touches on another area that i wanna talk about, that we won't talk about today, which is like, how does all that factor into kind of emotional health and happiness and, and and wellbeing where, you know, none of none of this other stuff matters if you're kind of unhappy. and so, so you have to, and and you've done so many podcasts on that topic, right? you've had paul conte on where you kind of go through the understanding of ourselves and our minds and, and why that's also a very important part of it, because it actually does impact how long you live. because if that piece isn't working, it's very difficult to regulate the first bucket. 'cause the first bucket takes so much work. so if you can't regulate yourself, it's very difficult to regulate the, the do's and don'ts. but even absent just length of life stuff, it impacts quality of life, which is this idea of health span as well. so i guess that's just my slightly different way to frame it, but it's a little bit more mey in that, you know, we talk about the behaviors, the exogenous molecules that target diseases, the exogenous molecules that target aging, aside from food, what exogenous molecules do you take? i take a few, right? so i take some that are disease specific, right? so i take a pcsk nine inhibitor, i take mpad doic acid, i take an sglt two inhibitor, and then i take at least one that is purely just based on the belief of its capacity in jira protection, which is ris rapamycin. and, and also the sgl s the sglt two inhibitor i think is probably just broadly jero protective. and we can even talk about that a little bit in terms of the success of one of those molecules called canagliflozin in the interventions, testing program, the itp, which i am sure we'll talk about in the context of nad as well. what dosage of rapamycin do you take? i take eight milligrams once a week for as long as i can tolerate it, but that i usually have to take breaks. why is that? i get these vicious asos ulcers, little mouth sores, canker sores, yes. ugh. about 10% of people get them. hmm. it's paradoxically the only biomarker we probably have. so i, i secretly rejoice in knowing that at least i'm getting a good batch of rapamycin by virtue of the side effects by virtue of these miserable side effects. interesting. but so, so in reality, what it works out to is i'm probably on it for two months and then off it for a month on it for two months off it for a month or thereabouts. and the idea there is that you're limiting mtor, you're causing your cells to grow less mature, slower, and in that sense, slowing down aging. is that the idea? yeah, i mean, y you know, and this will be an important theme today, right? it's like we can talk all day long about mechanisms and theoretical arguments for why it would work. and i think my conviction around taking rapamycin is less about sort of looking at the molecular explanation for why rapa works. although i find that to be quite convincing. and why does the inhibition of mtor stimulate autophagy? why would that suppress senescent cells? but truthfully, my conviction around mtor is far more based on the experimental data, something that is actually sorely lacking in the nad story, which we'll discuss. so the experimental data are far more convincing, right? which is when you look at the administration of rapamycin or its analogs, for example, everolimus, when you look at the administration of these molecules to organisms that are as close as possible to the species of interest we're the species of interest. so looking at mammals such as mice and small primates, looking at fruit flies, looking at worms, and even looking at yeast, although that's so far from us that you would argue that's the least important. you see something that you don't see for a single other molecule, which is uniform life extension. no other molecule has done this. it's very important to understand there are only two interventions full stop, that have ever extended life across those four categories of echarts, caloric, restriction, and rapamycin. very important point, right? how do you feel when you're on rapamycin, aside from the canker source? yeah. which fortunately aren't that frequent, you, i, i don't feel anything and the very few of my patients who take it, because i i maybe 10% of my patients also take it. i've never heard, actually that's not true. i've heard, probably heard two people say they feel better on it, but, you know, i don't know what to make of that. maybe they do, and maybe that's just a placebo effect. does it synergize with caloric restriction or collide with caloric excess? meaning if you're taking rapamycin, but you're slightly over your caloric needs, maybe you're trying to add a little bit of body weight or happen to overeat a little bit, just because is it going to collide with rapamycin potential positive impact on slowing aging? yeah, it's a good question. andrew. i don't, i don't know. i don't think we know, we do know that there's one other really important readout we're waiting for, which is matt caplin's dog aging study, which is, is is gonna be an exciting readout in 2026. we're also waiting for another readout outta the university of san antonio looking at another, another trial in mammals. and again, i think those two will be really interesting, right? because we have a ton of, we have just an overabundance of mouse data that are so reproducible and reproducible in really good mouse models. you know, as you know, i'm sure from your work, the model you choose matters, right? and, and sort of you, you, you know, in an ideal world, you want to use a mouse model that is, you know, not inbred that is more closely related to the what we care about, which is ourselves. and, and so when you see many labs getting the same result over and over again, regardless of how they do it, you really start to believe there's a signal there. so now to be able to see this in a higher order mammal and ultimately in companion dogs, which is where matt kalin is looking, i think that's, that's gonna be really exciting. and i've often said to my patients, look, in 2026, i'm either gonna feel a lot more conviction about taking rapamycin and prescribing it to some of my patients, though again, not most, or i'm gonna, you know, have a second look at this and say, you know, maybe, maybe we just shouldn't be taking this, right? because i do think that the dog study is gonna be more telling, but again, we'll have to wait and see what that shows. without going off track too much. my understanding is that the dog study was halted because of a lack of federal funding. is it continuing? it is going to go on. there's, there's, yeah, there, it's, so, so initially there was kind of insufficient funding to do the study in an adequate way, and then it turned out there was a shortfall of about two and a half million dollars to do the, the study that matt really wanted to do. and then actually a group of us raised that money for matt and did that so great. me and a so few of my patients and a couple of other folks came together and put the money in to close the gap. but yes, there has been, what, what's what, what did get pulled back by the niih inexplicably and in, in my view totally incorrectly, was the ongoing surveillance program, the funding for the ongoing surveillance program that would allow this type of work to continue and to allow greater follow up on this. so yes, unfortunately, until we can get more funding, we're, we're, we're not gonna be able to maybe do as much as we'd like to do and understand this, which again, when you look at some of the things that are funded, it's hard to believe that there's not a more interesting question right now in biology than this drug that seems so promising. why we wouldn't want to know, you know, if this is something we should all be taking is, is kind of a mystery to me. yeah. well, i was on ni study sections for many years reviewing grants. i rotated off as a regular member a little over a year ago. and i can tell you that the whole process is designed to be as targeted to the best and most exciting work possible. but there's a number of features now that make it such that it's largely the work that's already mostly completed that gets funded. even even go like, how's that work? but anyway, we could have a whole other journal club discussion about funding. but i, i had to ask, i was curious. so hope hopefully that that study will get completed and thanks for raising those funds. let's talk about nad. yes. it's in essentially every cell of the body except red blood cells. correct? you know, i, i don't even know if it's in red blood cells. my intuition is, i i i've never looked to be honest with you, but given that red blood cells have a different metabolic pathway, right, where they're purely glycolytic, i don't, they wouldn't have the need for it in the way that others would, but they might, right? 'cause they still undergo redux potential. so it's possible nad is in every single cell. yeah. and it's generally thought to be associated with energy production and mitochondrial pathways in every single cell, right? so nad is again, one of the most ubiquitous molecules in the body. and most of what it does, and i mean most meaning like somewhere between five and 600 pathways of it utilize nad as a co-factor, meaning that it's not consumed in a chemical reaction, but rather it serves as an electron shuttle. so nad and nadh basically play catch with electrons, and that's 99% of what nad is doing in the body. and for that reason, nad is so tightly regulated in the body. the levels of nad in the cell are really tightly regulated. and that shouldn't be surprising. just as glucose really tightly regulated ph or hydrogen ion concentration really tightly regulated. we as a species cannot survive outside of a very narrow band of ph. right? if it's below seven or above 7.8 on a zero to 14 scale, we die full stop. so similarly, nad is managed across all ages and across all physiologic conditions in a super tight band. there's another place where nad shows up and that shows up as a substrate, right? so cofactor means used co-enzyme used but not consumed, recycled. that's 99% of it. a small fraction of it is used and it's used by these things called sirtuins that consume an ad as an actual substrate in the process of dna repair. and maybe we can go into this, but this is really where the story picks up. it's also as i recall, where the story began. that's exactly right, right? it was some experiments where the sirtuins were mutated in one direction or the other, meaning gain a function or loss of function. these days people heal, gain a function and they immediately think to pandemic related themes. but gain of function is a way of changing genes typically to augment a function, increase its robustness, or in some cases, to rescue a phenotype where you have a knockout mouse that lacks a gene. so that's loss of function or a strain of yeast that lacks a gene. and then you do the gain of function rescue experiment. you re reintroduce the, the gene of interest. it's an important, i wouldn't even call it a control, it's an important experiment in any case because loss of function will tell you a lot. yep. but gain of function and loss of function, assuming that the results jive tells you much, much more. this is one of the major areas i think this is very important to highlight where human genetics really struggles. because you can get humans with a mutation in a particular pathway. like, i don't know, the sonic hedgehog pathway. they're somebody is hypomorphic for sonic hedgehog and you know, they might actually lack a, a major tooth up in the middle because the role of sonic hedgehog at the midline. and you could say, okay, well loss of function here, here's the role of sonic hedgehog. but the ideal experiment is to put the gene back in and then rescue that phenotype. because as any logical mind can tell, there could be many things downstream of sonic hedgehog that could create the phenotype that you observe. but if you put sonic hedgehog back in, yes, that's still true, but you get more reassurance that that's the gene of interest. so with respect to sirtuins, as i recall, they deleted the sirtuins. yeah. so let, let's use another example of what the gold standard is here or what a great example is. so, so i recently did a podcast with dina dall from ucsf on clotho, which is a, an amazing scientific story. and it's a great story because it shows how accidents can lead to great discoveries, right? so there was a, a researcher in japan who is really interested in understanding hypertension, high blood pressure. and they had created a mouse model where they were trying to knock out certain sodium channels to see if they could perturb blood pressure. and then there was this one strain of mouse with this one knockout that died really, really quickly and it developed like devastating neurogenerative disease and died very quickly. and you know, like a good scientist, he didn't say, well that sucks, i'm gonna discard that one 'cause it didn't give me what i wanted, which was the blood pressure change. and he kind of went and figured out what was going on and he figured out that there was a certain gene that he had hit that wasn't a sodium transporter, and instead was this other gene. he named it clotho. so, so you had this one piece of evidence right now, which was if you knock out that gene, you kill an animal very quickly. now that doesn't mean it's a longevity gene, you have to do the other experiment. to your point, you have to overexpress that gene and ask the question, do you live longer? and sure enough, when they overexpressed that same gene that they had just knocked out and killed the mouse, the thing was living 15 to 20% longer. so it's both necessary and sufficient. yeah, for extended life. so that's how you can say, well, that's a longevity gene. so let's go to the sirtuin story. so it goes back to the late nineties, matt caplin again, this is amazing, right? so you have this guy who's like the leading authority or one of the leading authorities on the, on the work going on today with rapamycin, along with one of his colleagues, david sabatini and a few others. but when, when matt was a postdoc, he did an experiment in a strain of mice, pardon me, a strain of yeast, i think it was the w 3 0 3 strain of yeast. and he over expressed sir two, and lo and behold, the yeast lived longer. now, a year later, someone else in the same lab took a different strain of yeast and calorically restricted them, and they also lived longer. i forget the name of that, i forget what that strain was. it was something three 16 was a, but it was a different strain of yeast at that moment. again, this is about 25 years ago, a hypothesis emerged, which was we have two different strains of yeast. and in one of them, when you overexpress sir two, this gene, they live longer. and in this other strain, if you calorically restrict them, they live longer. the understandable hypothesis was caloric restriction, which we had known was life extending, is working through sirtuins. that hypothesis sort of fell apart about four years later when matt capin again this time with brian kennedy did another experiment in a different, yet a third strain of yeast that allowed them to test hypothesis. because there was a problem with the story i just told. when you took the 3 0 3 strain, this is the strain that when over expressing sir two lived longer, if you took that strain and you calorically calorically restricted them, no change, that's odd. even more odd is when you took the three 16 strain, and this is the strain that lived longer with cr, if you over express sir two, no change. so right off the bat, the story didn't make sense, but it was further solidified that that story didn't make sense when brian and matt published in 2004 and yet a different strain, god, i'm blanking on the name, it's like bby 47 42. like you know, these don't matter if you calorically restricted them, they lived longer if you overexpressed sir. two, they lived longer. if you did both, they lived even longer. it was additive again, further suggesting that overexpression of sir two and caloric restriction independently and separately extended lifespan. these are parallel pathways. they're parallel pathways for reasons that honestly escape me. andrew, there are still people who maintain that the benefit of sirtuin overexpression is through the caloric restriction pathway and vice versa. and that's wrong. my reading of the literature, in addition to every person i have talked to on this who works in the space, including matt caplin, who has done the most research on this, is that there is no evidence that caloric, restriction and sirtuins operate through the same pathway. and in that sense, i think there's, there's relatively uniform agreement that caloric restriction extends life across the model systems we discussed. right? what about in humans? what, what about it specifically? does it tion or, well, that experiment's never been done and never will be done. yeah. the joke i was trying to set up for is the one i'll make now, which is no one wants to be in the control experiment. that said, nobody wants, i would argue nobody, nobody wants be, wants to be in the treatment experiment either. oh, you got me, you got me, you beat me to the punch. yes. no one wants to be in the treatment group either because it requires eating so little. yeah. you know, it just the the people, yeah, the joke is appearance. the joke is, is you probably will live longer and it will feel even worse. like it's just, it's, yeah, caloric restriction, which by the way, there are real debates about whether it will extend life in humans because it will clearly, i shouldn't say clearly. i think it would be a very safe bet that severe caloric restriction will absolutely reduce the risk of most chronic diseases. meaning i, i have, i think there's very good reason to believe that if an individual constituently consumed 25% fewer calories than they were meant to eat, their risk of cardiovascular disease, cancer, alzheimer's disease would go down. the problem is what things go up? what does that do to your immune system? what does that do with respect to sarcopenia? what does that do to your risk of falling? yeah, frailty. yeah, exactly. yeah. so you trade one set of diseases for another, it's not at all clear that lifespan goes up. and by the way, when you even look at some of the wild, like some of the animal literature where they're using different strains of mice that are not inbred and they don't put them in hermetically sealed situations, they don't live longer. so it's not always the case that caloric restriction extends life. and therefore, while it's safe to say caloric restriction probably reduces the onset of chronic disease that might not translate to an all cause mortality benefit based on those downsides. but all of that said, i think the holster two in story got off to an incorrect start where it basically lopped on to the cr story, which was, hey, we've got this thing cr that we've known since caloric restriction, right? caloric restriction, we've got this thing, which you know, for 50 years we've known has a signal that really says it's life extending and we've got this yeast where it works and this other yeast where sirtuin activation works. oh, it's gotta be sort. but again, if you, if you go through the story in detail as i just did there, there's no evidence whatsoever that sirtuins have anything to do with chloric restriction and vice versa. it's incredibly interesting because i think when you look at cell biology and you see these parallel pathways, when you see these effects of experiments where changing sirtuins or changing caloric, restriction independently increased lifespan, combine the two, you get this what appears to be a synergistic effect. but it's, as you pointed out, an additive effect seems like a pretty straightforward experiment to do. you could just do an occlusion, right? you could of course then put back in the sirtuin or adjust calories and see whether or not you get the effectively whether the math is corrected. yeah. you know, so now none of this gets to the question you raised yet. that's just all, that's all prologue, right? that's like where did this story come up? but then the question becomes, well if you believe that sirtuins are truly a, a factor that drives longevity, how can you activate them? right? how do you activate a sirtuin? so we have to now simultaneously start to hold things true in parallel that may or may not be true. so we, we, we want to then ask the question, do we believe that what we saw in yeast, which i think is the only reproducible finding i can draw, meaning this is a reproducible finding in many, but not all strains of yeast. if you overexpress c sirtuins, the yeast will live longer. so let's park that in the parking lot as a very likely statement. you would then say, well, if it does it in yeast, does it do it in flies? does it do it in worms? does it do it in mammals? you, you wanna be able to check those three boxes because again, that's a billion years of evolution. so if something works across a billion years, we'd be much more confident it works in us. yeah. making a fly mutant just offline mutant that over expresses sirtuins a worm cl against mutant, that over expresses sirtuins. that's a pretty quick experiment to do. yeah. because of this short generation time of those species. right now a mouse, it's a longer experiment, but i'm guessing all of those experiments have been done. yeah. and the only one that i can find that has demonstrated a survival advantage is one particular transgenic mouse experiment that over expressed cert six. and it did indeed for the male mice increase lifespan by 10 to 15%. so this is one transgenic mouse model that over expressed cert six. and those mice, the male mice lived 10 to 15% longer. the female mice did not, we should probably clarify what a transgenic mouse is. i talked about knockout mice. that's when a gene or genes in some cases is deleted from the genome. so it's null. it does not express that gene. the gain of function would be to put back that gene in. that would be a knock in mouse. so in that case, you still get some normal expression of the gene from the endogenous genome. but now you have a transgene that's inserted there. and there are all sorts of important intricacies that relate to this. for instance, where the transgene is inserted, if it's, you know, downstream of, of an enhancer that's muscle specific, then you can get a mouse that it overexpresses sirtuins just in muscle. you can get it ubiquitously expressed. there are a number of different ways that this can happen. i'm assuming this was ubiquitous expression of, you said cert six. cert six, yeah. so every cell in the body that normally would express cert six would express more cert six i, i don't remember andrew to be honest with that. i'd have to go back and look at the paper. okay. i don't know if it was muscle specific or whole body specific. i, i'm guessing unless they made it clear that it was tissue specific, that it's whole body. so we're talking about it when peter says transgenic mouse, he's talking about a mouse that has this transgene that causes it to express more cer two and six than it ordinarily would. and let's assume, although we, we don't know this for sure that the other genes in this mouse are functioning as they would normally. right. so again, just to summarize that, that's 2012. we have this one transgenic mouse. you put cert six, you overexpress cert six, and all of a sudden the males were living 10% longer. again, to be clear, the females didn't experience a difference. and that's not uncommon or unheard of in longevity research. there generally are sex specific differences and you always have to read the fine print. the first thing i always look at in a study when i see a difference in sexes, or frankly any difference in longevity, but it's always great when they parse them out by sexes, is how long did the controls live? but i went back and actually looked at the kaplan-meier curves on that exact study. and yes, indeed, i think that's a real effect. so let's take stock of now two pieces of information that i think we could say is probably true. it is probably true that in a handful of strains of yeast, if you over express cert, you are going to live longer. that tends to be completely independent of caloric restriction. that's the single thing i can say with the greatest confidence. and there is at least one transgenic strain of mice that if you get it to over express a different cert, cert six. but again, they're, these are homologs throughout the species. so we don't have to get, i don't think we need to get wrapped up in cert two versus cert six. you'll at least make the male mice live longer, but not the females. what sorts of things are downstream of sirtuins? and that question translated to normal english is what is changing as a consequence of increasing the sirtuin? could it be, for instance, well, unlikely based on what we already know about caloric restriction in the fact that they're independent parallel pathways. but is it something related to glucose metabolism? is it something related to clearance of senescent cells? i mean, i'm just throwing out possibilities here. yeah, actually you've hit two of the big three right off the top, right. so we believe that when sirtuins are activated, they're improving mitochondrial biogenesis. they are in increasing dna repair. so that's probably the biggest one. and by the way, that's sort of what brings us to the, the nad story and also reducing sass, right? so the soluble products of senescent cells, so, so tamp, so in other words, those are all three good things, right? so you tamp down on senescent cells, you increase mitochondrial biogenesis, and you increase dna repair. those would be all great things to do. and we think that sirtuins are probably doing all of them, this business of dna repair and reducing, you know, fragmentation or mutations to dna that are naturally occurring has been a hot idea in the field of aging for a long time. is that because when x-rays became popular or post nuclear fallout that people showed accelerated signs of aging? i mean, how did we get from dna mutation to accelerated aging? like, well, i mean, i think we, we know that as we age, it's just a stochastic process, right? like given the ubiquity of dna replication and the fidelity of the system, which is high, very high, but not perfect, there's going to be mistakes. actually, this is an interesting question. so in 2016, i went to easter island with david saini and nav chenell and tim ferriss. so the four of us just took a trip to easter island to see the birthplace of rapamycin. so it was kind of like vacation slash science journey. that's a nerdy vacation. it was awesome. and you know, so just picture hiking around this incredible island just talking about science all day. but this was an interesting question that i posed to nav and to david, which was, why do we see such a clear and present association with cancer as we age? and why is it so non-linear? so it's not just that cancer goes up with age, it goes up like that. and i said, i'll offer two hypotheses, which is more compelling. is it simply that as we're aging, dna replication, again, taking a step back for the listener, cancer is a genetic disease, meaning by definition, it, it is sort of, the canonical problem with cancer is a genetic mutation that leads to two properties of a cell, the inability of the cell to rep to control replication. so it interrupts cell signaling. so cells replicate, but then don't know when to stop. and then the introduction of the capacity to spread the, this property called metastases, those are the two hallmarks of cancer. so, so we know that that only happens in the context of genetic mutations, but why does this happen later in life and not at the beginning of life with very few exceptions. and, and so the question is, is it because over time mutations compound? is it because there are more mutations as we age, or is there a third issue? which is all of those things are happening normally and they're no more abundant when you're 80 than when you're 20, but your immune system can't detect them as well. and the truth of it is, we didn't come up with an answer, but it's probably all of the above. so it's probably that as we are aging, we are undergoing more dna damage and or at a minimum, the dna damage we're undergoing is less amenable to repair. and that's part of the thesis here. part of the thesis here is as we are aging, we are less and less able to repair dna. and one of the arguments that put forth, although we have, we're not quite ready for this part of the story yet, but i'll just say it now and we'll come back to it, is we don't have enough of the substrate that the sirtuin needs to repair dna and that substrate is nad. so again, remember at the outset i said, look, there's two big categories to think about. nad, most of what nad is doing is operating as a co-factor for electron shuttling. that's the nad nadh electron transport, electronic sep, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. okay? not consuming nad, just using it to pass electrons back and forth. but then over here we have this other category where we use nad as a substrate, it gets broken down, and that's what the sirtuins are doing to repair dna. okay? so if that's true, and if nad levels are declining with age, it's a logical conclusion that should we give more nad, right? if you're running outta substrate to repair dna and dna repair is an important way to thwart aging. it all makes sense. so we'll keep that over there. but before we do, i wanna come back to one other story, which is the story of sirtuin activators. so what's the most famous sirtuin activator of all time? what is the heavyweight champion of sirtuin activators that has taken up 99% of the bandwidth in this space? it's a lovely little chemical called resveratrol. okay? so resveratrol, which gained a lot of fame in notoriety because it happens to be found in trace elements in the skin of grapes, and therefore shows up in wine, gained a lot of notoriety. about 20 years ago when one lab doing one experiment, somehow was able to convince some people, including a very large pharma company, that resveratrol increased lifespan. so the thesis was, resveratrol activates sirtuins. sirtuin activation is important because of all the things we just said, right? it improves mitochondrial biogenesis, it's suppresses senescent cells, and it, it enhances dna repair. so if you have something that is such a potent activator of sirtuins and you give it to a mouse, that mouse should live longer. now, lots of experiments were done that couldn't find that, but one experiment was done. but it was a, it was an interesting experiment. i've discussed this at least on two podcasts, including one with rich miller who runs the itp, the interventions testing program, which later tested resveratrol and found that it did categorically nothing in this one experiment that worked. the investigators took a bizarre mouse model where they force fed it an enormously high fat diet, and in doing so, they created such an abundance of fatty liver that the livers of these mice encroached the chest, the thoracic cavity of the mice. so the mouse died prematurely because they couldn't breathe. and in that particular mouse model, resveratrol rescued the mice. so again, let's just assume that all of that is correct, and it's possible that there were even errors there, but let's just assume that's correct. let's assume, so this is resveratrol delivered orally? yes. in the food, yes. very high doses, mega doses, the equivalent of barrels of grape skin, exactly like doses so high you could there, you know, if you recall, we're both of an age that's old enough to remember this. there was this period of time when people thought this was the explanation to the french paradox, right? why on average do the french live longer when they consume so much wine? and the answer was, it's got to be the resveratrol. turns out that's not true at all, because yeah, you would need to be drinking your body weight and wine a day to get the doses of resveratrol that were needed to produce this effect. but for whatever reason, there was an effect, which is if the thing that was going to kill you was your liver being so full of fat that it shot up into your chest so you couldn't breathe, which i've never seen a human no matter how bad their fatty liver has been, where that's been the case. but if that's, if that's the problem you're going to face, it's possible, at least based on this one mouse experiment, that you were gonna live longer. but again, it turned out that there was no other replication of this in mouse models that matter. and that always comes back to the itp, the interventions testing program, which is the most robust tool we have scientifically, to measure these exogenous molecules. so the itp is an nia funded program that runs out of three independent labs. and by independent, i mean they're each doing the experiments independently, but they're, they're in sync with doing the experiment, but they're doing it in triplicate. so you have three labs, three great labs doing the experiments in triplicate. and when they did the ris trol experiment, and they did it in combination with the people who found the result of that study. so they consulted these people and said, what dose should we give? and they said, do this, do this, do this. and they did it. and nothing, there was no effective resveratrol. and that res result has been consistent across the board. so that's also a very important part of the story, which was, if resveratrol was a sirtuin activator, and i don't know if it really is, it clearly has no effect on lifespan with the one little asterisk that says, unless your body weight is 50% fatty liver, then maybe it does. i'd like to take a quick break to let you know that the huberman lab team has launched a new podcast with host dr. andy galpin. andy is an expert in exercise science and human performance, and has long been a fan favorite on the huberman lab podcast. this new podcast is called perform with dr, andy galpin. and it dives into topics such as how to build muscle and strength, how to improve your cardiovascular health, and how to optimize recovery and sleep for performance and much more. andy is an absolutely fantastic educator and true expert on all things human performance. i know you'll thoroughly enjoy his new podcast and learn a ton of useful knowledge from it. so please check it out and give it a subscribe wherever you're watching or listening to podcasts. now again, the podcast is called perform with dr, andy galpin. so let's see. let's just take stock of where we are in the story. we've got the whole yeast sirtuin situation, which is, at least in some yeast, sirtuin overexpression lives longer. no evidence that that works through caloric restriction. truly no evidence that's been known for 20 years. now, that paper was published in 2004, and that was a follow up to papers that had been published in 2002, 2 19 99, et cetera. you later on, you'd have the 2012 transgenic mouse study. so now the question is, okay, how do you activate sirtuins? how do you activate? well, well, yeah, so, so, so, or or more to the point, why don't we just give people nad? okay, so the, again, the nad story is, nad levels are declining with age in most tissues. it appears most prevalent in the skin of all places. and i think we should come back to this 'cause there's one interesting finding associated with augmenting nad levels in the skin. and my thought is, i wonder if it has to do with the fact that skin experiences the greatest decline in nad. it's also interesting because keratinocytes and skin turnover every 28 days or so. so you could imagine because it's a novel population of cells, that they would have steady expression of sirtuins and nad, then they simply die for whatever reason. or that it starts off very high on day one of generation then tapers off quickly. but that's not the case it sounds like. yeah. you know, on average skin over the course of your lifetime, we'll see about a 60% reduction in nad. whereas other tissues, and this is now based on, you know, animal studies, the brain might see a reduction by 15 to 20%. and the same would be found even in humans looking at the blood. so if you just sample, you know, whole blood in people at the age of 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, you're gonna see about a 20% reduction in nad. what about neurons? i mean, you've got the same set of central nervous system neurons your entire life. and of course some peripheral neurons as well. yeah, that's about a thing, but there's some regeneration in the periphery. so we need to, let's just talk about brain. so unless you're talking about the olfactory bulb where you have constant turnover throughout the lifespan, you have the same hippocampal neurons except a small population, same hippocampal neurons, cortical neurons, retinal neurons that you were born with. are we observing nad levels tapering off as we age in in animals? yes. obviously in humans we're not doing that experiment. but yeah. now here's an interesting point. in 2015, a study was published in pnas that looked at nad levels in whole blood over time. and it found, indeed nad levels were going down about 10 to 20% over four decades or so. but that same study said nadh levels were going up by the same amount. explain the role of nadh for people. nadh is the electronic scepter. so when you, when you the, so let's maybe take a step back of like, what, how do we, why are you and i sitting here talking and not dead? like, 'cause we have enough nad, right? right. like what's going on? right. so, right. you and i ate something at some point in the foreseeable past that contained chemical energy. so we ate something that was organic. so it had, so primarily fats and carbohydrates contain carbon, carbon bonds and carbon hydrogen bonds. and those bonds contain a ton of energy. but how do we liberate the energy? so we break it all down into these constitutive molecules, namely glucose on the carbohydrate front and free fatty acids on the fat front. and then our bodies break those things down further into smaller molecules that get shuttled into the mitochondria where the lions share of our energy liberation comes from. and what we do is we take that chemical energy that is stored in a carbon to carbon bond, or a carbon to hydrogen bond, and we turn it into electrical energy. and people have heard this term, it's called the electron transport chain. so there are these four complexes in the mitochondria, and there's an inner membrane in an outer membrane across which these mitochondrial, these large mitochondrial complexes reside. and what they're doing is they're building up a huge electron gradient by sh by breaking them apart and taking the electrons and transferring them between nad and nadh so that at the end they can do another trick, which is transfer those electrons to a-m-p-a-d-p and ultimately make a tp. the finished product is water and carbon dioxide. so we eat and we take that chemical energy and food, we utilize oxygen in the mitochondria to make a tp carbon dioxide, which we breathe out and water, which we breathe and pee out. so what nad and nadh are doing is playing an absolutely essential to life role in facilitating the transfer of chemical energy to electrical energy. back to chemical energy. a tp is just taking it from one chemical form in food to the electrical form is the intermediary in the mitochondria back to an electrical form of a tp. so you and i are walking around flush with a tp, which as we sit here right now, we're constantly firing off phosphates again, now turning the chemical energy back into electrical energy in, away we go. so yeah, this, this whole nad nadh thing is like, you know, it's central to our existence as any form of respiration. so my point, let's go back to the story. the story was nad levels are going down as we age, but nadh levels are going up suggesting that the total amount of nad and nadh is the same. and what's declining as we age should less be thought of as a reduction in nad and should more be thought of as a reduction in what's called redox potential. the ability to do what i just said. so when people say nad levels decline with aging, the answer is yeah, but what's really declining as we age, and this kind of comes back to what you said at the very, very outset, like what's happening at the cellular level, i think what's happening is our mitochondria are not as good as we age and we have less redox potential. and i would say a fair number of, so-called anti-aging approaches are targeting the, so-called reactive oxygen species r oss, which impede mitochondrial function. essentially, this is an opportunity for me to call out the work that i think is at least intriguing, which is the work of a colleague by the name of glenn jeffrey at the university of college london. he's been in the field of visual neuroscience for a very long time. and a few years back he started doing some experiments on animals. and now also two studies published on humans showing that exposing the aged eyes, so 40 and older to red light and near infrared light for a couple minutes, a few times a week, can spare certain processes involved in vision photoreceptors. how does this work? well, the idea, this isn't proven yet. the idea is that it's reducing reactive, oxygen, species and thereby improving mitochondrial function in what is perhaps the most metabolically active cell type in the entire body. not just the eye, which are the photoreceptors. hmm. so it's an intriguing set of studies. again, we don't have all the mechanisms worked out, but it brings us around again to this idea that mitochondria are vitally important for the functioning of cells. things that impede the function of mitochondria can either reduce the output of and or kill cells. and so anything that can improve redux can potentially keep a cell around longer functioning better. so when i hear about the role of nad in this pathway, i think like most people, i think, okay, well then i should just take more nad and maybe i will age more slowly where i will replace some nad that's missing as i age in whatever cell type turns out. that might not be so straightforward. right? i mean, i don't wanna jump to supplementation just yet, but if we are to back up from nad a little bit and look at the pathway leading to nad, it's and nr, nmn and nad, we'll spell these out in a moment. and this sort of competition that's out there in the market is around either infusing or in some cases ingesting nad directly taking nmn, which is the precursor to nad orally. i haven't heard of anybody infusing it or taking oral form nr, which is the precursor to nmn. my understanding is that nmn is simply and nr minus a phosphate group. yeah. and, and i'll take a step back from this. be first to say the following again, let, because this topic is so confusing, i think it's just worth reminding everybody of what we now, everything we've said and where it brings us, right? so i'm not gonna repeat the whole sirtuin thing. let's just leave that alone. 'cause everything we're on right now is upstream of sirtuins. yeah. it's basically like once you establish that we think sirtuins matter, even though they don't work through caloric restriction, and that's about the single most obvious thing i can say, they might still matter. even though we don't have things that we figured out can activate sirtuins like resveratrol, we don't seem to have things that we can give you that activate sirtuins. we're now onto the next part of the story, which is, okay, sirtuins matter, they don't seem to matter. we think sirtuins matter because of a few of these overexpression experiments. and we're making a big leap that because they mattered in yeast, they're gonna matter in us. that's a huge leap for which there's zero evidence. right. and i'm only leaping further to this discussion about how to increase nad, because i know that's in the back of people's minds. that's right. we're not, we're not gonna double click here just yet. i just want to frame that up. 'cause ultimately, ultimately that's where we are headed in terms of people making decisions as to whether or not they should take nr or take nmn. yeah. and the reason or refuse nad or none of the above, and the reason i'm being such a hard ass about this andrew, is i spend so much time fielding questions on this that i realize we just have to talk about this. and exco, she, it, it just in the most detailed fashion possible. i agree. so that people understand why, right? because it is just too easy, right? there's this great quote by jfk that i'm gonna paraphrase that is basically people endure, you know, enjoy the comfort of opinion without the discomfort of thought, right? so we need to sort of, this is, this is a podcast to get people to think and understand the entire history of this field so that they can actually make an informed decision about a supplement that i'm going to argue has very little scientific basis for its justification. i, i would say scientific justification for longevity. i'll, i'll go on record now saying that i take nmn and in some cases i will take nr and nmn and i observe this is just n of one self observational data. i observe a very clear positive effect, but i don't think it has anything to do with extending lifespan. and we, and we should talk about both healthspan and lifespan benefits when we get to that part. but we're, so to bring us up to where we are now, where you are with, should people be supplementing nad? we're, we're basically at the point where we're taking a lot of leaps of faith and saying, because nad levels are going down and redox potential is going down. we believe supplementing nad in one form or another makes sense. but before we do that, we should acknowledge something. yes, nad levels are going down, but we have no reason to believe that raising nad levels will correct a problem. in other words, if the body operates between this level and this level of nad, and if you go below this level, you die and you go above this level, you die and levels as you age go like this. do we believe that raising them to this does anything we've, there's no evidence that says it does. so that's a leap of faith. it's okay to take leaps of faith, you just have to know you're taking a leap of faith. okay? so leap of faith, number one is the sirtuin thing, leap of faith. number two is the caloric restriction thing, leap of faith. number three is this matters in our species. the species of interest, leap of faith. four is, you know, the whole sirtuin activator thing. and now this leap of faith is if we just increase nad levels in us, it will produce a positive benefit. okay? so now how do, how do we, how do we do that? now you get into the tactic. okay, there were three ways to do it, as you said. one is you can intravenously take nad, by the way. you could probably also orally take nad. it would just break down in the gut, into its constitutive products. and then probably reform. but for the purpose of how people actually do this, they intravenously get nad because it's not orally bioavailability or as you said, they orally take two precursors, nr and nmn. my personal view on this is there's not really much of a difference in what you do. in, in other words, at the end of the day, all of these things are generally going to increase nad levels in the blood. so a couple of kind of practical notes. i've taken nr in capsule form. i've taken nmn typically in powdered form where i put it sublingually under the tongue. my understanding is that, have you done intravenous nad? i sure have. and, and what i, did you experience an niacin flush? no, i, i took nad in a, as an infusion. i've probably done it five or six times. and for the first 10 minutes of the infusion, you feel like somebody's stepping on your chest with a boot, your legs cramp up, you feel nauseous. i did not take the anti-nausea med that was offered. i don't like taking things if i can avoid it. i just figured i'll just experience this. it was very uncomfortable to the point where you couldn't read a paper or a book. you just, you just wanna be left alone. you actually get a little bit irritable. you're like, this is awful. you know, every noise in the room is a bit too loud during that first 10 minutes. and then by the way, do you know how many people have said to me that because of that experience, they know it must be doing something good? oh my goodness. to, to which i'm like, why don't you spread your legs? let me kick you right in. the nuts that's gonna feel even worse is that doing something good, like the fact that something feels so awful shouldn't be used as an explanation for why it's doing good physiologically. right? i don't know what it was doing physiologically except making me feel miserable during the infusion. there are ways to adjust this even without the anti-nausea meds, for instance. you can slow the infusion. that's the typical way people will put it in over the course of several hours. anywhere from three hours to a as brief as 30 minutes is kind of the record that i've heard about for 500 milligrams of nad. if you put a thousand milligrams in there, obviously it's more painful and you have to, anyway, there are a bunch of practical considerations you feel. now, maybe it's placebo, but one feels quite good afterward. so as soon as the drip is done, you feel better than you did prior to the drip. how do you feel if you just receive an iv infusion of the same volume? i've done that because i've received saline drips. you also feel pretty good. yeah, it's hard to, yeah. disentangle these things. and typically they'll put other things in the bag. glutathione, some vitamin c, you know, they tend to sell these as kits. i decided to try it. yeah, it seemed fine. i did it when traveling. i dunno, maybe i'm due for another one soon. but for me, the more typical way to try and increase nad or whatever, because i don't know what it's doing exactly, but i like the effects of taking sublingual nmn. the single most, let's say, salient to me, anecdotal data on taking sublingual nmn is that it makes my hair grow really fast. it makes my nails grow really fast, and i do feel an increase in energy. and i take it first thing in the morning. and what dose? one and a half grams, 1500 milligrams. so by, by the way, if you translate, you know, the, the doses that they give mice in the studies where they're testing the efficacy are typically on the order of 500 to a thousand milligrams per kilogram. whoa. yeah. i'm a hundred kilograms. yep. whoa. okay. so picture that the next time you're giving yourself some nad or nr, i'm not even approaching that. yeah. at all. well, it's clear to me, based on my read of the data, that nr can cross the cell membrane directly, directly very easily. there's no obstacle to nr getting into cells. okay? and nmn cannot because of the x or phosphate group, so that if you take it sublingually or you ingest it orally, it goes into the gut. the phosphate group is cleaved. and because of that, the argument is that if one were to compare the benefits of taking nr versus nmn, there are more data to support nr as a precursor to nad a more effective precursor to nad than orally ingested nmn. but some people will say, well, i'll just take more nmn than i would nr. and then this gets into the realm of cost. it's effectiveness. it's, it's just a commercial, it's just a commercial issue. it starts becoming a battle between commercial sources. yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. this is, and i don't dispute that nr makes more sense as a precursor, especially at dosages of, you know, 300 to 600 milligrams versus 1500 milligrams. but i've opted to take sublingual nmn mostly based on cost and are at the dosages. people recommend is quite expensive. imagine you had to take it at the mouse doses, right? you'd be spending about 300 bucks a day. right? it's just, it's not feasible. it's just not feasible. so, you know, i don't have a deep desire for my hair to grow faster or my nails to grow faster. it's more the increase in energy effect. now, i will say that sublingual nmn is also a bit of a laxative. so there are all these, and i say that, you know, somewhat chuckling, but you know, some people say it makes them feel better. well, is that because you're, you know, evacuating your bowels a few minutes or hours later and then you feel less bloated and you have more energy? you know, it's very unclear. i think what has not been done as far as i know, is to compare orally ingested nr at say, 600 milligrams, a relatively high dose versus a gram of sublingual nmn, and then actually measure blood levels of nad. if that experiment has been done, and i'm not aware of it, i'm not aware of it, then forgive me, maybe someone will put it in the show note captions. but i guess this gets down to the question of how many people are taking oral nr or nn men or are taking nad infusions, which by the way are quite expensive. anywhere from $300 to a thousand dollars a drip. that's pretty expensive. think about that. what benefits are they getting? like what are they getting out of this? like, what are they getting? is it an acute increase in nad that, that what that that causes them to live what, a week longer? i mean, we have no idea. well, so, so let's, let's try to use data to answer the question, right? so this is exactly the thing that the itp, the interventions testing program was designed to test. and again, i, i would, i would, if people are interested in this, they should go back and listen to my two discussions with rich miller, where we go through gory detail of every molecule that has gone through the itp. the itp is hands down the most rigorous tool we have for testing molecules in anything other than the species of interest. because we can't do these experiments in human, we cannot test lifespan interventions in humans for the obvious reasons. so what is the next best thing? well, it turns out it's doing it in a non inbred mouse, in triplicate in three institutions. like you can't get more rigorous than this. the itp has tested probably north of 50 molecules, meaning it has done the same experiment for 50 different molecules. and very few have extended lifespan. and the notable failure is nr. nr was tested, and i believe it was tested at a very robust dose, either 500 or a thousand milligrams per kilogram. and there was no extension of life. there was no improvement in health span. there was no change. mega dose, nr, placebo, same result. conversely, let's consider some of the successes of the itp rapamycin. when you give rapamycin, the first time they did it because they had a hard time formulating the rapamycin, they weren't able to start it until the mice were like 21 months old, which is very old for a mouse that's like a 60-year-old mouse. and at that point, they almost aborted the experiment because they were like, well, what's the point? nothing is gonna work when you start this late, including caloric restriction, by the way. although it has worked in one experiment. but nevertheless, it worked. and when you gave rapa that late in life, it still worked. then they redid the experiment and they gave it earlier it worked. canagliflozin, as i mentioned, which is an sglt two inhibitor. it worked a carbo, a drug that inhibits glucose absorption worked and interestingly didn't require weight loss. so the thesis behind giving a carbo to the mice was, it's a caloric restriction mimetic, a cr mimetic. and it worked. but then the, but the, but the treatment mice weren't any lighter than the non-treatment mice. which actually goes back to something you said at the very outset, which suggested that tight glycemic control, independent of weight, is a longevity benefit. the same was true with the sglt two inhibitor. canagliflozin sglt two inhibitors cause you to pee out more. glucose a carbo prevents you from absorbing in your gut. so two different ways to regulate glucose. neither of those experiments resulted in a lower body weight for the mice, and yet they both lived longer. again, there's something very important about regulating blood glucose. the other thing that worked is 17 beta est, or seven, sorry, 17 alpha estradiol. and it only worked in male mice. so again, suggesting that, well, we can come back to that. it's more than we wanna get into at the moment. but the point here is there are very few molecules that have withstood the scrutiny of the itp. it, it is, it's a high bar. metformin failed by the way, for, and the itp is specifically for offsetting aging. is that right? it is, it is lifespan, but it also looks at some measures of healthspan. but it's, it's primarily, it is the gold standard for lifespan. yep. because my understanding is that there are some studies that have explored the role of supplemented nr, maybe nmn as well. yep. but certainly supplemented nr for sake of lowering inflammation to offset some of the negative effects of time zone shift alcohol. i have a few others listed here. overnutrition. yeah. so let's talk about that. so, so in 20, i don't remember what year it was, it was somewhat recent. a study was published looking at nr with something called terra still bean. so terra still bean is believed to be a sirtuin activator like resveratrol. so commercially available product called basis. and it was tested, there was a, it was a three arm study in humans, roughly 30 people per arm. so decent sized study, right? this is a big study. so you take a hundred people, more or less with fatty, liver, disease. now this was documented with an mri of the liver. so they're looking at hepatic fat in the liver by mr. and using this type of mri, if your hepatic fat index is over a 5%, that's a high enough degree of what's called s steatosis, that you have fatty, liver disease. now, of course, this is not, this is not an a digital thing, it's an analog, right? there's a, there's a spectrum to this. so, so you know, you start with just fat accumulating in the liver, but as more and more fat accumulates, you start to get inflammation that results in scarring and fibrosis. and ultimately you would get to cirrhosis. so just keep it in the back of your mind, the threshold at which we would say you're, you're in the, you're, you're, you're, you're in the danger zone is once you hit 5%. so this study randomized people to either a placebo or a regular dose of this product, or a double dose of the product. and i can't remember exactly how much is in the product. i think it's either two 50 or 500. so then that would be what the regular group got of nr. and then the other group was getting two x that, so it's either two 50 and 500 or 500 and a thousand. i don't recall. they also looked at something called the, they, they looked at many things, right? so they looked at all sorts of biomarkers. and the primary outcome for the study was, did you see a reduction of this hepatic fat via the mri? so what happened? so they, they did the study and lo and behold, there was no difference. there was no difference in anything. okay? so, so at high dose, at low dose, there was no difference in how much hepatic fat you had at the end of the study. there was no difference in body weight. there was no difference in inflammatory markers, there was no difference in glycemic markers, glucose levels, liver function tests, any of those things. so in that sense, it was a null study. but they did one sub-analysis, which again, you have to be very careful of. 'cause a sub-analysis is not a primary outcome, but it's a kind of a, a way to go and parse the data. and they did find one statistical, one statistically significant finding, which was if you limited the analysis to people who had a hepatic fat score below 27%, remember i said once you're above 5%, you're, you're sort of, you have fatty, liver, disease. well, they had people anywhere from, you know, 10% to 40%. wow. but if they looked at people who were below 27% in the low dose group, there was a statistically significant reduction in liver fat. if it sounds like i'm machining, i am, let me say it again. if you limited the analysis to people who had below 27% on this hepatic fat index, the people who got the full dose had no difference. they averaged 20% at the beginning of the trial and 19% at the end. no statistically significant difference. the placebo group averaged 20% at the beginning, 20% at the end. but the single dose of the drug went from 20% to 15%, which was statistically significant. it's not clear that that's clinically significant, which is a pretty consistent theme in this type of research. never confuse statistical significance with clinical significance. if i gave you, if your blood pressure is one 60 over a hundred and i give you a drug that lowers it to 1 57 over 97, that could be statistically significant. if the variance is small enough between people in the study, it has no clinical, significance, i haven't changed the course of your life. so again, that to me is one of the, one of the two big findings that people point to, to say, aha, there was some benefit in fatty liver disease with this. but again, when you read the fine print, which i just vomited out to you, i i don't think anybody's looking at that going, oh, we, we just found the solution to, to nafl d the second study that people point to a lot was 2021 or 2022. this came out of a group at wash ui believe. and they looked at nmn and they looked at glucose disposal. so in this study, they asked the question, we're gonna take two groups of people. you're gonna get a placebo for a period of time, or you're going to get nmn for a period of time. and we're gonna then do what's called a a, a type of glucose challenge where we look at how well you dispose of glucose with and without insulin infusion. and in the placebo group you would look at pre and post glucose. so, so pre and post placebo treatment, was there a difference in glucose disposal with no insulin? no. what about with insulin where you would expect to see much more glucose disposal? no difference. but when you did that with the nmn group, there was a statistically significant increase in glucose disposal with insulin infusion. but it was quite small. in other words, it was clinically very insignificant. and just to make, just to sort of figure out how insignificant it was, i went back and actually looked at some of the red light data. 'cause there's an interesting study that shines red light on a person's back and then does an oral glucose tolerance test. oh yeah, yeah. and you can actually reduce like postprandial glucose by 8%. is that meaningful? not really. i mean, not in this, not in this patient population, because these people were all pre-diabetic and they had very high glucose. so it was against another example of something that was statistically significant but not clinically significant. and the same thing was true in this study. right? but again, people would, would probably point to these two, two studies because they're in humans and you had this one, if you squint and look really hard and take a sub sub subset of the analysis on this one measurement we saw, you know, a result a, a responsive hepatic fat going from 20 to 15%, which is still three x above the threshold to have fatty, liver disease. and in this other study you had this, you know, very, very modest reduction. pardon me, increase in glucose disposal. but i mean like we're, you know, there's a saying in my, in my sort of mind andrew, which is like, if you have to resort to really interesting statistical machinations to see something, there probably isn't something very interesting there. right, right. i totally agree. and i think, you know, at this point i'm questioning whether or not i'm wasting my money taking nmn or and nr. well, any one positive. the reason i take nr is really for these anti-inflammation reported purported effects. i just want to pay a little bit of attention to the whole commercial battle around this because i think it's relevant. i mean, i think right now, as far as i know, the fda has essentially said that nmn should not be sold as a supplement, but it is still being sold as a supplement. so there's a little bit of a ignoring of the and of the fda's request. and nr, as far as i know, is authorized for sale as a supplement. yeah. so it's generally regarded as safe. it has an fda designation of grass, which means it is not regulated, generally recognized as safe. right? and so that means anybody can sell it. the fda will have no oversight. they're not telling you whether they're not gonna put a stamp on it that says what they're selling is what it is and they're, you can't make a claim about it that isn't validated by some sort of study. so i honestly andrew, i think the whole nmn and r debate is irrelevant. i i think it's just a commercial debate. i think it's literally just posturing about how can i carve out a different market. i don't think there's a scientific reason to favor one over the other. well, you just answered the question i was going to ask, but i suppose the question therefore becomes, is there any benefit to taking either of them for sake of lifespan? so there's one benefit i could find. there's one benefit i could find that i think is genuine. there were a few other really insignificant ones that fall into the category of goofy studies that cherry pick by data mining. okay, so, so there's studies that like, gave people nmn and looked at a shotgun approach of many different things. like did it change ldl cholesterol, hgl, cholesterol, triglycerides? and the answer is, oh look, there's a small decrease. but it was totally insignificant clinically, even if statistically significant and oh, it increased your, you know, six minute walking test or whatever, and it's like a six minute walk test or whatever in people who were in their twenties is irrelevant. it had no change in vo two max. it had no change in any meaningful metric of performance. one test, one study i could find that actually had what looked like a signal to me. and it was a study that looked at skin cancer rates with, and i can't remember if it was nr or nmn, but honestly i don't think it matters. 'cause i think they're basically equivalent one's just got a phosphate group on there. you might need to take a little bit more of the nmn versus nr or maybe a lot more, who knows in order to get the same increase in nad is my understanding. so this one study found somewhere between a 60 and 80% reduction in basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas. now i found no difference in melanomas. so again, you know this 'cause you just did a podcast on this. melanoma is the skin cancer that kills you. but that's not to say that, you know, squamous cell and basal cell carcinomas aren't problematic. they can be very, you know, deforming, they can require pretty aggressive surgeries to address them. and so if indeed there is something that can reduce the risk of basal and squamous cell carcinomas, that may be a rationale for taking it. and i should say that basal and squamous cell carcinomas are very, very common. they're very common and they are very clearly associated with sun exposure in a way that even melanoma is more complicated and has a genetic component. and there are other things going on, but squamous and basal cell carcinoma are very clearly related to sun exposure. as you said, they're quite common. and so, you know, personally, that's an experiment i would like to see repeated because if indeed nr and or nmn reduce the risk that significantly of squamous cell and basal cell carcinomas, i think you could make a case that if you're an individual who's at risk for those things, clearly i'm not. right? like i, i've never had a sunburn in my life. i mean, i, i don't work outside, so it's like it wouldn't matter to me. but there are a lot of people for whom either, either their skin color makes them more susceptible or their, their, you know, their, their pastimes or, or frankly their, their, their line of work makes them more susceptible. you know, maybe there is a case to be made for it. there. if, if you could, if you could literally take 60 to 80% of your risk away on squamous basal cell carcinoma, that couldn't matter. and by the way, i don't know if this is true, but you, you may recall at the outset, the outset i said that when you look at all the tissues in the body where we see a reduction in nad, do you remember what had the biggest reduction? it was skin. so there's a part of me that wonders, like is the reason that the only place we see a really good signal potentially for nr and nmn supplementation is, is in a skin cancer, although it's not melanoma, which is the one we'd really want to see. i mean, if this reduced the risk of melanoma, i would take it, right? because even though i'm dark skinned, i'm still susceptible to melanoma. so i just wonder that could be true, true and unrelated. but that's, that's the first thought that crossed my mind when i came across that literature was, hmm, i wonder if the enormous reduction in tissue nad in this particular tissue explains why maybe there is a benefit to it. assuming somebody is averse to feeling like they have an elephant stepping on their chest and they're going to pay $750 for it, aka, an nad infusion once a week. and look, people may opt to do that. people with the disposable income could do that, drip it in slower, not feel nauseous, increase nad with the hope, hope, hope that maybe it's going to extend your life. most people considering supplementation to augment the nad pathway are going to default to either taking and nr or taking nmn. by the way, just going back to the group that have decided that a thousand dollars for an nad infusion and dripping it in over two hours is a good use of their time. what do you think would be the improvement in their lifespan if they spent that two hours exercising significantly greater? interesting. alright. just noted. and, and less expensive, but yeah. right. you could also weight train for the first hour and then enjoy some food afterwards. yeah, lane norton taught me that there are data showing that exercise and particular resistance training improves the rewarding properties of food, makes food taste better, which we've all kind of intuitively experienced. so you spend the first hour working out, second hour eating, if you had an extra two hours a week to choose between paying a thousand bucks or 700 bucks for an a d infusion or you know, lift weights for an hour, go for a half an hour walk and listen to your favorite podcast like the huberman lab, and then eat a meal for half an hour. like i, i can just think of so many better ways to spend time and money. but anyway, let's, let's not digress. okay, well i'm going to pull a little bit from marketing text here, but i trust these showing really? yeah. okay. yeah, i do. because they have citations to support them and we can include the citations. okay. these are not, i'm, i can say these are, these are not linchpin arguments for doing one thing or the other, but we already established that nr and nmn are quite similar except for the presence of a phosphate group on nr that gets cleaved off. so again, you might have a slight dose issue, but at the end of the day, you're giving, and nr and nr is freely taken up into cells, it turns into nad. so this is all a big sort of shell game of how do you get nad up and, and again, i think we've established and we can, we can agree that, that there is an increase in nad, at least in the blood and probably in the liver when you take exogenous nad or a precursor. let's pause that or nr. yeah, that's right. right. so, great. well then you took the words right out of the, the data i was going to refer to that's right. because i asked a few folks that helped develop some of the nr supplements, like what are the data yep. that support the use of nr for increasing d and they say nr can cross the cell membrane directly. that's right. nmn cannot. okay. but yep, yep. you can matter. just clear the phosphate group. right, exactly. and nr, they claim, i'm not, this is not my claim, but they claim the nr is quote unquote 25% more effective than nmn in raising whole blood nad levels. but i'm guessing that's that's probably dose milligram per milligram. exactly. okay. so then you just adjust the milligram dosage a little bit and so on. what's entirely unclear is what raising blood nad translates to in terms of getting more nad into cells. i don't know that that's specifically cells, like skeletal muscles. right. i think based on josh rabinowitz's work, i also had josh rabinowitz on the podcast to talk about this. and i trust josh on this much more than i would trust any marketing material. sure. because he doesn't have a dog in this fight. right. he just, you know, he just does the work. and what josh's research sewed, which is basically nad flux research has demonstrated that, look, the liver is probably the place of greatest uptake in addition to blood. and that's about all we know. like, it's not clear how much of this is getting into other cells. so i mean that's the rest of it is just, you know, i think rearranging deck chairs on a titanic as far as like how much does it really matter? and, and again, i don't even think it's worth arguing about whether nmn or nr is more bioavailability because to your point, you can sort of adjust the dose and i trust that whatever you're taking nr or nmn, you are getting some nr into the cells and that's being converted to nad. but we still keep coming back to the jugular question, does that matter? does increasing intracellular nad matter when the system is so tightly regulated? so i think what you see is a lot of marketing material that tries to make the case that you can do it. great. i'll grant you that you can do it. does it matter? does it matter in lifespan the answer appears to be unambiguously no at this point, does it matter in health span? i think that's what we're discussing, right? i, there's something so sticky about the longevity field, just so sticky about this idea that one could take something and extend lifespan and people don't wanna be in the control group. so they're willing to invest significant amount. so money to do it. well, i mean, i think the, the bigger issue is like you can't do the longevity experiment in humans. and i'm sure that these companies that sell this, and i honestly, i don't follow this space. i don't know how many of these companies there are out there. i, i can name two because the, you know, five years ago, which was the last time i really dug into this, i knew who the two dominant players were. for all i know there could be 20 companies today that are selling and nr and nmn, i don't know any, they're probably about 30 to 50 prior to this fda ruling. okay. which is kind of an interesting situation in its own right. yeah. you know what happened there was the supplement nmn, suddenly the fda decided that it should not be sold over the counter anymore because there was a clinical trial initiated on nmn, which essentially makes nmn a drug for clinical testing and thereby can't be classified as a supplement any longer. that was the rationale as i understood it. but as with things like n-acetylcysteine, that was more of a lobbying effort though, right? i think. right? i i, i don't, i don't think actually that was a scientific decision. i think that was more of a lobbying decision. right? right. from a, from a market protections, from an ip protection standpoint. right. and this had happened prior for n-acetylcysteine. yep. nac. which some people take, it's a mucolytic. yep. it's actually a great decongest. yep. if you're congested and it increases glutathione. that's my understanding. and i believe somebody checked me on this, does it decrease or increase glutathione increases glutathione is my understanding. yeah. if i have that wrong, someone will tell me quickly in the comments. my understanding is that in europe, nac might even be available by prescription in the us you can still buy it over the counter. but a few years back the fda said, nope, can't sell nac any longer. and there was a pushback lobby to keep it on the market and you can still buy it on amazon. the same thing has more or less happened with nmn and certainly with nr, although nr was never in question in terms of whether or not it should be sold as a supplement or not. because as far as i know, there's no clinical trial on nr, at least not currently. so there's a clinical trial on nmn, which classifies it as an experimental drug and therefore the fda said, nope, you can't sell it as a supplement. a few companies, major companies pulled nmn from the market in the us many smaller companies just kinda watched and waited and continued to sell it. and i checked prior to the beginning of this episode, and you can still buy it online. but of course a lot of what we're saying today is kind of a why would you, we're not really coming up with strong arguments for taking nmn, at least not in today's discussion. yeah. i mean, again, i think the strongest argument i could make based on the data would be potentially on the, on the, on the basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma risk reduction. if indeed those results are reproducible, that again, that's, that would be a justification again, for the right individual wouldn't be a justification for me, might be a justification for somebody. but really the rest of it is why, why do you need to do experiments on this if you're selling a supplement when you don't need to make claims to sell a supplement. like if it's a drug, you have to have an indication, can't sell a drug without rigorous trials that demonstrate both safety and efficacy. i do think it's pretty safe to say that i, i i do think nr and nmn are probably safe. there has been some voice around the idea that nr could increase the risk of cancer. right. and the experts in this area, like charles brenner have pushed back hard on that arguing that the studies were not done well. is that, i recall, i i think that's probably fair. i don't think there's been a well done study in this entire field is is part of the problem. right. so, so, and then that's probably too harsh a statement, but, but i i, this is not a field that's like, you know, that's necessarily lending itself to the rigor that you would in, in, in pharmacotherapy. and i i i think there are probably, you know, you mentioned charles brenner, like i think charles does good work, right? and he works on many things, not just this. yeah. and, and, and, and by the way, i don't, i don't think, i don't hear charles out there saying that, and nr increases lifespan. no. in fact, i don't wanna quote him at all. but i think he would argue that sirtuins and nr nmn should not logically or practically be linked to efforts to extend lifespan, but that there are some interesting positive effects of augmenting nr as a means to increase nad forsake of anti-inflammation and some of these other effects that we've been discussing. yeah. that's my understanding of his position as well, is that i, i think he firmly agrees with what i laid down at the outset of this, which is there is no meaningful logical connection between the relationship of sirtuins, caloric, restriction and nr. that's, that's just a, that's a shell game that is empty. and, and you're right. i mean i think part of the reason why i think there's much better research going on with rapamycin is that there's really no commercial interest in rapamycin. like nobody's gonna make money selling rapamycin. it's 'cause it's so cheap. well, yeah, and it's actually not cheap, but it's a drug that is off patent. right. okay. so this is a drug that was approved by the fda 25 years ago. so generic forms are inexpensive enough that nobody, believe it or not, they're not, this is the irony of it is, is generic. so rapamune is the brand drug that was initially approved in 1999. and today if you go and buy rapamycin, you're gonna not buy rapamune. you're gonna probably buy generic sirolimus or rapamycin. and yet it's surprisingly quite expensive. now it's not enormously expensive 'cause you're not taking much of it, but it's about five bucks a milligram. that's pretty expensive. so if you're taking eight milligrams a week, that's 40 bucks a week. yeah. is probably what i spend on rapamycin. that ain't cheap. no. relative to, you know, and it's cheaper than some things i take, but it's not cheap. but the point is like nobody has a commercial interest in rapamycin. right. it's sort of an irrelevant drug. it's, but the interest is scientific. right. and, and, and the commercial interest is in what we call rapa logs, which are analogs of rapamycin that are being investigated by a number of companies to, to look at new indications. for example, immunity, immune function. right. so rapamycin historically is thought of as an immune suppressant because that's the context in which it was approved for patients undergoing organ transplantation. but you know, i think joan manic and lloyd k stein, when they published that paper in 2014 using everolimus where they took a group of 65 year olds and randomized them to either a placebo or different doses and dosing schedules of everolimus found an enhanced immunity in response to an influenza vaccine. which again was, for me that was the turning point, right? that's when rapamycin went from something that was interesting based on the first itp in 2009 to maybe we should be taking this in 2014. so between 2009 and 2014, i was kind of looking at the curiosity of rapamycin and saying, well cool that it worked in mice. i don't think humans should ever consider this. yeah. to that study, which was like, wait a minute, something's different. if you take rapamycin as a human, at least every day, it seems to suppress your immune system. but if you just pulse it once a week, as they did in that study, it seems to improve immune function, which again means it's an immune modulator, it can go up or down in the immune system. that was really the, the hypothesis that emerged from that experiment. and so now the question is could you design drugs that are more specific to emptor complex one, which rapamycin is not. but you can get around that by dosing it intermittently. and then of course, you know, is it a drug that has efficacy in, in terms of other, other things that can be tested in humans that are not longevity? 'cause you can't test lifespan in humans, obviously. right? you're 50, right? 50 years old, 51, 51. you seem to be vigorous, you take great care of yourself. how much do you think taking rapamycin for how many years have you been taking it six has contributed to your current state or vigor zero idea. this is my opportunity to ask about your belief or lack of belief in biological aging tests. because if somebody's going to experiment with any or all of these things, they may want to evaluate whether or not their biological age is changing. and there are a number of these tests available and people love this stuff. love 'em, they love 'em. i mean, who wouldn't wanna see that? they are 51 years old, but they're biological age is 37. i just did a movement test the other day. so it's a, it's a, it's a very fancy camera system where you, it's got a million cameras on you and you, you go through this whole exercise, how high can you jump, how far can you throw? like it was awesome. and then it gives you a movement. age andrew, i was 22. i believe it. i mean, i'm on, i should be, i should feel amazing. do you actually think i move like a 22-year-old? i mean, are you freaking kidding me? no, you're, i, i bet you if i went and did that again tomorrow i'd come back at 31 or something. there is so much nonsense in this type of testing it, it is just, you know, look, there's probably something to be said if i do that and i come out at 22 as i did versus 92, sure. i would com i would grant you that. if you took 150 year olds and you put them through a movement test, the ones that really, really are struggling will come out older. and the ones that really, really are doing great are gonna come out younger. so great. i guess it's not, i guess i move reasonably well for a 51-year-old, but it's simply impossible to believe that i can do today what i could do when i was 22 with respect to movement and strength and power, which is what that was assessing. you're doing a lot of jumping, single leg jump here, do all this kind of stuff, balance testing, all sorts of things. and, and, and i guess i would say the gold standard for any of these biologic aging tests has to be the following. what is a better predictor of remaining years of life? chronologic age or biologic age. that's to me the most important standard. okay, so how old are you chronologically? i turned 49 in six weeks. okay. so i'm sure your listeners will not like to hear this because they would probably hope and believe that you are immortal, but some might want to hear that i'm gonna be taken out soon. but let's, let's just grant your mortality as a given based just on your chronologic age, an actuary would come up with a pretty decent prediction of how long you're going to live. now i would argue that that's a crude assumption because it doesn't take into account the fact that you're metabolically healthy, that you do all of the things that you do. but just based on the fact that you are a man who is 49 years old and who doesn't smoke, those three things would give me, if i were an actuary, a very good prediction of your life expectancy. and because i'm not an actuary, i don't know the exact number, but my guess is it would be predicted at this point at another 37 years. okay, well i bought that chart my life in weeks. yes. in fact i bought two of them for reasons that are uninteresting. but i've watched that chart, phil, not quite what you predicted, but i put my estimated lifespan to be 95. great, that's fine. and then i have little lines on the side of how much vigor i felt from and just overall wellness, completely subjective of zero being like completely cratered near death to 10. like it's best i've ever felt. but you do that, you make that note every how often. okay. so what i did is, you know, from 10 to 15 i felt, you know, blank. and then in my twenties i actually didn't feel so great because i was, i was working 80 hour weeks commonly, you can ask my former lab technicians, i was just talking to fong wind recently, and i mean, i used to work to collapse, not healthy, you know, 80 hour a week, maybe a hundred hours, occasionally maybe 70, maybe back to 40. but just too much work, not enough sleep nutrition, not great, not just not doing the right things, but just gave, gave my twenties to being in, in lab basically. and a lot of my thirties as well. so i would say from 40 to 45, my vigor was higher than in my thirties. and then now i track, i would say about every two months i'll start filling in that line. and it's adjusted for by stressors and adjusted for by positive things in life. and the goal for me is to figure out what are the behavioral tools and other things i can do or take that are going to keep the vigor as high as possible. vigor, wellbeing, internal piece, et cetera. all of that combined kinda what i'm calling wellness in this very subjective measure as high as possible as i transition to my fifties, my sixties, seventies and eighties. and i'm guessing that i'm going to have to do many more things in my eighties and nineties in order to maintain a similar, hopefully level of vigor and wellbeing than i do now. and the question is, will i be able to, yeah, maybe, maybe i, i, i might take a slightly different, different different angle on that, but let me go back and make one point and then we will come back to this point, which is actually really interesting. the yeah, yeah. because i think the chart is great. yeah. i think the chart more than any supplement for longevity gives you a, or gives one a visual perspective of where they sit in this long arc. and i don't think the brain is very good at anchoring us to the notion that we are mortal. because if we think about that for even a few moments too long, it makes us anxious. and i think we are very good at avoiding that reality. yeah. well it's, it's, it's, as you said, it's very difficult to contemplate finitude. so i, i actually wanna talk about that 'cause i think it's so interesting, but i just wanna make this point about the actuarial point, right? so let's just say actuarially, your expectation is 40 years more at this point because you're 49, you're a male and you don't smoke so we believe you have somewhere between 35 and 40 more years of life predicted on the basis of your biologic age. that's it. that's all i got. yeah. means you're gonna live to whatever, 88 to 91 or something. i'm making that up, but that's like, okay, i better get cracking on some stuff. so, so now let's pretend you went and did a biologic age test. okay? so let's say you did that and let's say it came back and said you're 25. so if, if i had a 25-year-old male non-smoker in front of me, what's his life expectancy? well, it's about 60 to 65 years. does that mean that you andrew have 60 to 65 more years of life based on a fact that your biologic clock says you're 25? do you believe that? oh, no way. no, of course not. now this would be an easy thing to test. not in humans, but you could do it in mice. right? interesting. that to my knowledge, that experiment hasn't been done. so right out of the gate, when i look at people talking about their biologic age, you know, well i'm, i'm actually 60 years old, you know, chronologically, but my biologic age is 35. my response is, who cares truthfully? like, is that a good thing? yes, probably. but does it, is it, is it, is it tangibly measurably meaningful? like to have a biologic age of 35 versus 40 versus 30 if you're 60? i don't think, i, i think we're, we're applying a very false level of precision to something that might only need to be directionally true. secondly, we don't really yet understand the biologic noise in that measurement, right? so there are lots of things that we measure that are really noisy. so if i measured your, i don't know, let's think of something that's very biologically noisy. your triglyceride level, like your triglycerides are pretty noisy. unless i do something very important, which is standardize it by how long it's been since your last meal. like, if you ask me right now what my trigs are, i have no earthly idea because, you know, i probably ate three hours ago, like i, and i don't even remember what i ate, how much fat was in it, how much carbohydrate was it? i have no idea. so the only way you could really get a triglyceride measurement and put any weight to it is if you've been fasting for eight to 12 hours, then we can at least say, hey, a triglyceride level of 50 milligrams per deciliter is excellent. whereas a triglyceride level of 120 milligrams per deciliter is lousy. but if you measured my trigs today and they meaning at this moment, and they were one 50, that could be totally reasonable. even though at fasting levels, i'm at 50. so we know that because we know exactly what goes into the triglyceride measurement. but when you look at a biologic clock that takes into account your glucose level, your vitamin d level, your epigenetic marker here or there, those are very noisy things. so how do i know when i measure it in you now versus when i measure it in you a year from now, i captured you in the exact same space. i mean, i don't, so it's for that reason that i just have a very hard time putting any stock in this. now does that mean that in the future we won't find some benefit in this? i, i, i think we probably will. i, i do think of all the things that go into it. probably the epigenetic part of it would be the most interesting. but again, what most people don't understand is sort of a dirty little secret is how difficult it is to measure the, and to sequence the epigenome, right? so to my knowledge, none of the companies that are doing this, i may be incorrect on this by the way, but the last time i looked, which was about a year ago, not a single company was correctly sequencing the epigenome on these things. hmm. so they were not able to accurately say what they were giving you an average representation of your methylation, but they weren't going base pair by base pair and actually sequencing this the way we would sequence the genome. so, so again, it just, it's so much noise in this system and i, i i just think it creates a little bit of a distraction for people, truthfully. do you avoid going through the non, let's just say the non-traditional scanner at the airport, the one that might use higher levels of radiation? no. no. do you think about how many flights you take as a source of radiation at no, let, let's just keep this all in context. so the, and nr c recommends that a human being, or at least an american should expose themselves to less than 50 milli seavers of radiation a year. okay? so what that number doesn't mean anything to somebody. so let me give people a sense of what that means. so how many milli seavers of radiation do you and i receive? 'cause we both live at sea level. so just ambient radiation living at sea level is one milli seaver a year. okay? so we just chewed up 2% of our annual allocation. what if you moved to colorado, now you're a mile up. that increases you from one to two milli seavers a year. okay. what if you had a ct scan of your chest, a ct angiogram? well, it depends on where you got it done. if you got it done at a really good place with a fast scanner and great software, probably three milli seavers a year. if you got it done at a place that's sort of average might be 10 to 15 milli seavers, pardon me, per scan. now here's what's really interesting. by the way, i'm, i'm totally fascinated by this question, which is how much radiation is too much a dexa scan, by the way, you can't even measure how many milli seavers you're getting. so a dexa scan is like less radiation than a cross country flight. so it's super, super, super low. less than an x-ray or anything like that. people who work in, in nuclear plants, i'm told, i haven't looked at the primary data on this, but i've talked to people who incessantly do this. so, so it's possible, i'm a little bit off on this, but i'm told that these people are at 10 times that level of radiation exposure and sometimes higher. so they're not getting 50, they might be getting like 500 milli seavers a year. and yet, interestingly, they're not at an increased risk for cancer. now, i'm not sure what to make of that, but it suggests to me that we probably don't need to worry about things like airport scanners and flights. in fact, even if you look at pilots who do constant flights across the poles, 'cause you're gonna get the most radiation going over the pole. to my knowledge, there's no convincing data that suggests those people are at an increased risk of cancer either. and they're, you know, they're obviously at the upper end of what an a civilian would experience in terms of radiation. so i just, i'm not convinced that that's like, that's something we should be stressed about. well, i think you just relieved a lot of people of some unnecessary concern. i wanna go back to what you were saying earlier about what you need to do in your nineties versus what you're doing now. so you said you think that in the, in your eighties and nineties, you're gonna have to work harder to preserve the vitality that you have now. yeah. grip strength, jumping, cognitive function. i mean, i've got very good genes in terms of longevity on one side of my family. pretty good on the other. although not as robust. i mean, if i just look historically, yeah, who, who knows, right? i mean, but my sense is that i'll live to be 95 if you know, barring, you know, bullet buster or cancer. so i would say that yes, you're gonna have to work hard in that last decade of life to preserve those things. but i think it's the work we do now that sets the stage for that. it's the foundational work that we do in this period of our lives. you know, you and i are only a couple years apart, but i think this is the critical decade. it's in your fifties to your sixties and in your sixties to your seventies. that i think is, is the deciding time. fifties to seventies, fifties to six. yeah. fifties to seventies. so, so what is it about this, this window that you and i are just entering now, and why is it so important? i think it's important because we're, we're getting to that point where aging does start to show up. like i think if, if you and i are being brutally honest, like we're we're kind of half the men we used to be. and, and, and, and again, that just means like, look like a night of poor sleep shows up more, right? when you were working in the lab as hard as you were describing it, you could probably walk through walls when you were exhausted. yeah. short nap would reset me near completely. yeah. i, i got more colds and flus in that time because i wasn't taking such good care. but then again, i was indoors more. so. it's an imperfect experiment. but you're right. yeah. i think that as i've approached 50, i need to do more. you need to do more self-care. you need to be more mindful of what you're eating, how you're sleeping, how you're recovering from those workouts. 'cause we still do hard workouts, but recovery plays a greater role. in other words, we're just not quite as resilient as we used to be. you know, i was telling somebody the other day, they asked me about my residency. i don't think i'm being hyperbolic when i say this. i couldn't do one month of what i did for five years. i really couldn't do it. i don't think i, i don't think there's any, there's no way i could go back to that level of sleep deprivation for a month, let alone five years. so, you know, that's just a fact of aging. i think. so, but what we have to do during this period of time is build up as much physiologic reserve as possible. and so the, the important thing is we, you know, we have to stay in the game because con compounding makes such a difference, right? so, you know, we're still young enough that we can actually put on muscle mass. now, that's not always gonna be the case. it's gonna be very difficult to add muscle mass when you're in your mid to late seventies. it's doable, but it's very, very difficult. so instead we want to be putting on as much muscle mass as we can and increasing, or at least maintaining strength as much as we can. again, probably increasing it is unlikely. clearly we're not increasing power as we age. right. andy galpin has talked a lot about this, the atrophy of the type two muscle fibers, the two a muscle fibers really start to atrophy in your twenties and thirties. so i know i don't have a fraction of the power that i used to have, and i know that because my vertical jump is lit literally half what it was when i was a teenager. well, mine was never, mine was never very good. so i, and it doesn't matter how good it was. my point is like if you know what your vertical jump was at 18, 19, 20, and then you do it today, i mean, it's literally 50%. and that's one of the purest tests of power. so power's going down, strength is going down, but not as much. muscle mass is actually not, 'cause remember, that's the order in which you lose things, right? you're gonna lose power, strength, and size of muscle. but again, size still matters. it's still a glucose sink, all these other things. but what we don't wanna do is, you know, be outta the game. right? what we don't wanna do is injure ourselves and get a setback. that becomes very difficult to recover from. because you know, when you're our age, if you're inactive for months at a time, it's, it's gonna be two to one or three to one ratio of inactivity to activity to get it back. what about energy? sorry to interrupt. yeah. but since we've been talking about molecules and energetic pathways, what about energy? just that get up and go, let's just say after a decent night's sleep, seven and a half hours waking up, same time, more or less, you know, 6:37 am probably for you or me. and why is it that as we get older, we have less energy? our mutual good friend, the late ben baris used to ask about this. he used to say, he called me andy. he was like, andy, why do i have so much less energy? i was like, i don't know. i know, it's a great question. now, unfortunately, he died of pancreatic cancer. yeah. so there may have been other things going on, but that was prior to the cancer, at least as far as i know. you know, it's a very interesting question, why do we have less energy? and i don't think anyone's ever been able to answer that question. no. and when you have kids, you're gonna be even more starkly confronted with that. because i actually, it's one of the things i am most amazed by when i look at my kids, especially the youngest ones, the boys who are seven and 10 is what i just described as spontaneous outbursts of energy. like their inability to sit still, their kinetic desire to just like they will, like if we're, i remember once we were kinda walking through a mall and we're walking through the mall, they are sprinting ahead of us, sprinting back, sprinting ahead of us, sprinting back. like imagine if you and i were walking through the mall and i just started running ahead and running back. you'd be so sore the next day. but it's like, it just wouldn't occur to me to ever run unless being chased. right? like it's just, i mean like, like we now live a life like i think our ancestors did, which was, you know, if we're not deliberately in the business of moving for a reason, like you're exercising, you're going for a walk for the sake of going for a walk. like you just wouldn't, it wouldn't occur to you go and expend energy for no reason. and yet kids do this, it's amazing. and look, it's gonna go down by the time you're a teenager. like just going from being, you know, sort of 10 to 18, there's probably a significant reduction in spontaneous outbursts of energy, let alone where we are now. and it's a great question. who, maybe it's nad. i mean, i don't know, maybe, although up until now we've been talking about all these ways to try and increase nad in the bloodstream and hopefully in cells. and i don't know. i take my nmn and my, and nr and i feel a little bit of a boost in energy, but i can't say that it's so significant that i feel like i can sprint back and forth just spontaneously. these, again, it's just so hard for me to imagine that any supplement or any drug, including rapamycin, which i think is the most promising giro protective drug we have, i just can't imagine that those things even compare to what good sleep, good exercise, and good nutrition do for your energy, levels and vitality. and the reality of it is all three of those things are hard to do, you know? yeah, they do. especially if you're an adult. like, especially if you have a real life, you know, you've got kids, you got a job, which is presumably many people listening to us right now, like there's few people listening to us right now whose only purpose in life is to take care of their health. everybody's got something else they have to do, which means you have competing interests for how do you take care of yourself. so to sleep is not easy, right? like we all are busy as hell. we don't want to have to stop what we're doing to undergo a nighttime routine, to put ourselves in the right head space to be able to sleep, do all the things necessary, give ourselves that eight hours in bed to hopefully get seven, seven and a half hours of sleep. even people like me who like exercise, i know you like exercise, it still is a sacrifice in terms of time. and, and, and, and for many people, certainly for me, food is the hardest of these. all right. if left to my own devices, i'd eat fricking fruit loops all day. like i love fruit loops. right. interesting. by way of contrast, the food part is easy for me. i like healthy food and oh, i like healthy food. i just like all food. okay. i like, don't, like, i don't like unhealthy food. i, i, i've weaned myself off, i never really liked it that much. i mean, i like a great tasting slice of pizza or ice cream every once in a while. but i much prefer meat, fish, chicken, eggs, fruits, vegetables, rice, oatmeal. i just like that stuff. mm. i'm a weirdo that way i suppose. but on the topic of exercise as it relates to vigor and longevity, i'm intrigued by how some forms of exercise give us more energy, especially the same day. and how some forms of exercise or even timing of exercise tends to deplete us. because i think one of your major sort of calls to the public has been to move more, yeah. for sake of their health span and lifespan. but because of the time investment that it takes to work out in a gym or to go for a run or a ruck, i think some people think, well that's a lot of time. but if it gives you more energy and more focus to do other things well then it's great. so it's not just about living longer, it's about absolutely being able to do more. and i've noticed, i don't have any science to back this up, but i'd love someone to run a test on this that if i complete my workout before 9:00 am even if i have to start it while i'm a little bit fatigued, i have more energy all day long. but that if i initiate that workout, say mid to late morning, i'm pretty tired in the afternoon. it's like i give everything i have to that workout. and so it becomes a little bit defeating since i'm not a professional athlete or even an amateur athlete, i'm working out for health span lifespan, but i, i want to do exercise that gives me more life during my waking hours. i think somebody should study this. and i'm convinced that it has something to do with the change in body temperature that occurs across the day and the additional change in body temperature that occurs as a consequence of exercise. that's my hypothesis. do you notice a seasonal change in that? do you experience it more or less in one season or the other? i haven't thought about it that much, but not so much. not so much. and i wonder whether folks like our friend, jocko willink are able to do so much. he has so much vigor that guy in part because he basically exercises at the, just after the lowest temperature phase of the circadian rhythm. and he uses exercise presumably to drive himself out of that and get that, you know, temperature increase. that's the consequence of waking. but in his case, he's waking up so early four 30 is when he starts those workouts. so it's something for people to play with. it's something that i don't think gets discussed enough, which is, yes, you should exercise, do resistance training, do cardiovascular training, but play with the timing of those and see how at a given intensity it impacts your energy levels for the remainder of the day. i think that's a, i think it's an important metric that again, i, i just don't see a lot of attention to because i think if people could experience the increase in energy, that is the consequence of working out at the right intensity in the right way at the right times for them, they'd be much more apt to do it. it wouldn't feel like this, like spending money on something that sure will make you live longer, but then you're depleted and you can't do cognitive work. there's something pretty impressive about the fact that as far as i know, the last three, let's just call them, i don't want to call anyone out specifically major pillars of the high level administration at stanford school of medicine. to my knowledge, we're all 5:00 am runners. there's something about early morning exercise, and my good friend eddie chang, who's the chair of neurosurgery at ucsf, he's been on this podcast, known him since we were seven years old. he's an early morning exerciser and then he's got tons of energy all day. what about the reverse causality there? sure. do you think it's possible that they're, they have a whole, they have a system of high energy that makes jocko who he is or makes you know these people who they are. i don't doubt it. and as a result of that, they, they, they're able to work out five o'clock in the morning. yeah. i don't doubt it. i just have noticed that in the few times in my life where i've kicked my own butt to get out and start working out really early, i have more energy all day long. sometimes i still require a brief nap, but it's a pretty striking effect as compared to, you know, the 10:00 am workout effect. yeah. so i've started setting a standard of trying to get my workout done before 9:00 am so anyway, something for people to play with because the more energy to live in your waking hours, perhaps not longer, but certainly have more energy in terms of output, i think is a significant and undervalued parameter. so let's, let's quickly return to supplements. we, i think are converging on an answer about nr, nmn, and nad, which is you don't take them. correct. i take nr and nmn with not a lot of religious adherence, i should say. if i ran out, i might not buy it for a while. and the only observed effect for me is this accelerated hair growth, which is a pain in the butt, frankly. 'cause it just means i have to get my hair cut more often. i'm not trying to grow my hair faster, but, okay. what are some other supplements, if any, that you take that are peripheral to this pathway or separate from this pathway? rapamycin is a prescription drug only. right? so are there any over the counter things that you take that you would place into the lifespan category? maybe they touch into healthspan as well. i'm happy to list off what i do. but what are your, let's just say top five at least. well, i don't, i don't take that many. so top five would be a pretty exhaustive list. i think the other supplements that i take, i do take epa and dha in the form of liquid or capsule for oil capsules. not because i have a, an, an affection for capsule over liquid. it's just gonna increase my compliance if i take, i've done both. and i've noticed when i was taking liquid, 'cause you're storing it in the fridge, it's just, it's just one more step removed. and i, i was just less likely to remember to take it twice a day. i take thera human and there's some reasonable evidence in mci patients that the acumen improves cognitive function. so i think there's a relatively low downside to the hypothesis that the acumen may preserve cognitive function. again, i, i don't, i don't, i don't, i don't, i wouldn't put that in the category of like beat the table for it. right? i think it's just, you know, reasonable evidence. i take, i do take vitamin d because interestingly, despite the fact that i'm outside every day without supplemental vitamin d, my levels are surprisingly low. how much do you take? i take 5,000 iu and that takes me from kind of a level of 30 ish to a level of 50 ish. and there's, you know, there's a lot of debate about how high vitamin d levels should be. that's a whole separate podcast. we could, you know, waste time on that in, in 10 years. yeah. my appetite to talk about that one. let me think. what else do i take? because i sure. oh, i do take methylfolate and methyl b12. and again, the, the, the rationale there is i do think there's some evidence that elevated levels of homocysteine are bad in and of themselves. so there's no denying the fact that elevated levels of homocysteine are associated with bad things. that's unambiguously clear. meaning there's an association between badness and homocysteine. what's not clear is, is it causal in, there's definitely one mechanism you can point to. although again, mechanisms are what they are. we just spent how many hours talking about mechanisms that theoretically make sense that never pan out. but mechanistically homocysteine will inhibit the clearance of something called symmetric and asymmetric dimethyl arginine. have you heard of these things? sdma and a dma. so a dma and sdma regulate nitric oxide synthase and homocysteine impairs their clearance. and therefore when you have high levels of homocysteine, it par it, it results ultimately in impaired nitric oxide synthase and therefore low novar nitric oxide. so this has been proposed as at least one mechanism by which homocysteine might negatively impact vascular disease. so, and we also know, by the way, that a dma and sdma are cleared by the kidneys and therefore this might, this is also proposed as one of the mechanisms by which impaired kidney function is, is impacts vascular health. 'cause that's a known right, if you, if your kidneys don't work well, your risk of car heart disease goes way up. so this is now proposed as a link between what we observe with homocysteine and impaired renal function. so we know that if you take methyl folate and methyl b12, you're gonna lower homocysteine. that's abundantly clear. so the, the thinking is that that might actually lower a-d-m-a-s-d-m-a and raise nitric oxide synthase. again, relatively low cost. low risk, you know, thing to take at modest doses. i also, there's probably some evidence that over supplementing vitamin b is problematic, especially b six. so i don't think 'cause of peripheral nerve damage. exactly. yeah. so i don't supplement b six. i'm just taking a bit of folate and, and, and methyl b12. let me think, what else do i take? 'cause i do take a couple other things. oh, i take magnesium l three and eight and ashwagandha for sleep. i take s slow mag, which is just a, a magnesium chloride, slow releasing version of magnesium. and i take methyl, pardon me, i take magnesium oxide. so i take magnesium in three forms. so i'm a, i'm, i'm a, i'm long magnesium. you're carpet bombing mag with magnesium. yeah, i'm, i'm big on magnesium, right? yeah. great for bowel function. great for, i, i mean, i don't know the last time i had a cramp in my life, you know, it's been years since i've had a cramp despite exercising in a really hot place like austin, texas where i'm sweating like there's no tomorrow, whether you call it a supplement or not. i take, i, i take like electrolytes, i take element, which i should disclose. i'm an investor in that company. so i, i drink an element a day. i take creatine monohydrate five grams a day. i take ag most mornings. oh. and i take pendulum the probiotic. got it. yep. as far as i know, there's no other probiotic that has any meaningful effect on the body outside of pendulum. right. pendulum's the, because, because if you buy the argument that a probiotic for your gut needs to have anaerobic bacteria in it, there's no value in giving you aerobic bacteria. so you have to have something anaerobic. so akkermansia, which works through the glp one butyrate pathway is anaerobic and pendulum's the only company that can make it. i have no affiliation with this company. i think you should have the ceo colleen cutcliffe on your show. she's an actual scientist and she's fantastic. and it's a really interesting story how they kind of develop this and how difficult it is to actually make an anaerobic bacteria. and so this is kind of an odd company 'cause it's a supplement company, but they have to basically adhere to pharma gmp conditions to make it because of the anaerobic vats that you have to use infused with nitrogen to be able to make an anaerobic bacteria. so anyway, so i take three of their products. i take something called glucose control, i take polyphenol and i take akkermansia. okay. and i think that's the list. okay. yeah, i'll try and move through my list pretty quickly. i may miss one or two things and i dunno, maybe we'll put the list someplace online and fill in any gaps. i definitely take ag ag one. you know, i, my typical ad read, i've been doing it since 2012, that's true. i take one or two servings a day, three if i'm traveling. and i'll generally do that first thing in the morning or in the evening. for me, it's really about capping off the vitamin minerals that i might be lacking in my diet and also the whole adaptogen business i think, and polyphenols. and i'm a very interested in pendulum because part of the reason i take ag one is for the gut health aspect. i think just bowel movements are more where i'd want them. i mean it sounds kind of weird to talk about, but you just feel better when your gut motility is right. i feel like it adjusts my gut motility. so it's neither too fast nor too slow. so that's first and foremost, i take a quality fish oil, either the one that ag makes or carlson's in liquid form that has that lemon flavoring. and i make sure i get above one gram per day of epa. yep. so that's usually a tablespoon, sometimes two tablespoons. i make sure that i get enough d three typically from the dropper, 5,000 iu per day, approximately sometimes 3000, sometimes 7,000. i kind of play around that. and i test my blood levels. i also take methyl b12 and i also take tonga ali. so i take one capsule of that in the early part of the day that has lowered my sex hormone binding globulin, freeing up a bit more testosterone. it's why i like it. and i take a couple of green tea capsules in the morning. i drink here roman mate. that's more of a stimulatory effect. and i take the nmn in powder form, sometimes nr as well. and again, if i run out of that, i tend to go long periods of time without, i use element as an electrolyte. so people are probably noticing, this is all pretty basic. i take, in my case, 10 grams of creatine monohydrate per day. i sometimes forget to take it. that's why i take 10 grams. i'll sometimes miss a day. okay. and i certainly feel the effects of that in the gym because of the greater water volume in the muscles. but there are a lot of data on creatine monohydrate for sake of either maintaining or offsetting some of the cognitive dysfunction associated with sleep deprivation, maybe aging altitude and some other things as well. and then for a few months i was playing around with, let's say nicotine gums. i stopped doing that. first of all, i was dipping it and i ended up lifting for an entire episode of the lex friedman podcast that i only realized later. so i stopped taking it also because it gave me a, a kind of a tick and cough when i wasn't chewing it. hmm. and then i felt like i needed to chew it and it's a little too stimulatory for me before sleep. i take magnesium three eight, i'm really bullish on magnesium as well. apigenin 50 milligrams, which is essentially chamomile extract and theanine. and occasionally i'll take 900 milligrams and acetol also, or instead i kind of mix those up and around. and then i use a quality whey protein as a protein replacement, that kind of thing. and i've played around with various things like sheila g and you know, sometimes get the sense that it's having an effect, but then i'll stop taking it for long periods of time. you know, there are very few things that i've stayed with for long periods of time and i basically just described what those are. you know, if ever someone were to design a supplement that would provide more energy all day long, that wasn't caffeine, i'd probably look to that. but i ingest caffeine in the form of yerba mate and coffee. i've played around with caffeine tablets, you know, taking, you know, 50 milligrams of caffeine in tablet form. i mentioned that only because it has a distinctly different feel than ingesting caffeine through liquid form. it feels stronger. and i don't know why that is. in fact, i, there's a very well known podcaster who drinks peppermint tea and takes caffeine tablets as a way to, i don't know, drink peppermint tea, which sounds very nice and mellow, but also get the stimulant effect. so anyway, that's pretty much it. and then i do a lot of things as i know you do, mainly based on suggestions you've made about getting zone two, cardio rucking weight vest, walks and hikes three times a week, resistance training three times a week, cardiovascular training, one long, one medium, one short. and i try and hit the sauna and the cold one a week. and yeah, that's pretty much it. i think there are a bunch of other supplements that are really interesting and kind of fun to play with. if one wants to like 600 milligrams of alpha gpc or 900 milligrams of alpha gpc and a double espresso prior to a workout, you feel different. it's a stimulant, but i don't like to do that too often because of the increase in tmao that occurs and then you have to take 600 milligrams of garlic to offset that increase. and you start getting into if, if we believe tmao matters. right? if you believe tmao matters, i don't. okay, great. even better. i'll maybe skip the garlic. so things like that. i prefer to just eat garlic anyway, so there are a bunch of things like that yeah. that are kind of fun to play with as pre-workouts. but yeah, that's the core supplement regimen and it's the one i've stuck with for, gosh, at least 10 years. or in the case of ag you more than, you know, more than that. so i should say, because any discussion around supplements, i think it's going to, you know, have people pricking up their ears to, okay, this is like a sales pitch or something. i absolutely want to go on record. the things you choose to do and not do are going to have much greater effect on your health span and lifespan. that is the behavioral things in particular. sleep, exercise, nutrition, sunlight, et cetera, than any one supplement that you're going to take. so i do view supplements, i think through the appropriate lens, which is that they are indeed a supplement. they are not necessary, many of them are simply sufficient to serve as an insurance policy or to augment mental and physical health. maybe longevity in ways that make it worthwhile, given my disposable income that i want to devote to supplements. but i don't think you need them. yeah. i'll go even more extreme on that statement. everything we have talked about on this podcast today, whether it be nr, nad, nmn, thera, human magnesium, this supplement, that supplement, all of that stuff while potentially mattering, i would put in the category of, was the titanic serving lobster or steak? look, i, i like steak more than lobster. that's a relative discussion. exercise, sleep, nutrition, emotional health is the question of what was the heading of the titanic. okay? so i just want people to understand the magnitude of what we're talking about, how you eat, how you sleep, how you train, and how you take care of your mental health is the equivalent of what direction was the titanic going with respect to the iceberg. all this supplement bullshit that we just talked about is equivalent to were they serving lobster or were they serving steak? and was the band playing this song or that song? i'm not saying those things don't matter, but just put them in the context of the direction the titanic is going. okay. so i completely agree with you. exercise, sleep, nutrition, and emotional health not listed in any particular order. peter and i both completely agree. those are the critical four before we close. and nr nmn and a d and nad in particular. how do we view this? is it a pathway that we should be focusing on in terms of supplementation or infusions for sake of extending our life? my answer on that is no. yeah, i would say the same. you know, i, i don't remember who said this, but someone, maybe it was nasem tale, said, don't tell me what you think, show me what's in your portfolio. like meaning people who pontificate about this stock versus that stock. he's kind of like, assuming it was him, that said this. he's like, okay, i, i don't care what you're telling me. tell me what you own that's gonna show me your conviction. so through that lens, look, i'll show you my conviction on exercise. i'll show you what i do. i'll show you my conviction on sleep. this is what i do. i'll show you my conviction on all these other things. i mean, i don't take these supplements full stop. i don't take 'em 'cause i can't afford, it's not that i can't afford 'em, it's not that they're any inconvenience to me to take 'em. i passionately do not believe they do anything for me. and why would i waste time, money, anything on something that i really don't believe makes a difference. now again, i am always happy to be proven wrong and i am very happy to say that two years from now, five years from now, we could be doing this exercise again. and in the presence of new information, maybe i'm not taking rapamycin and maybe i am fistful, you know, nr and nmn possible i will, i will reserve the right to change my mind for the rest of my life in the presence of new data. but as it stands today, i do not take these supplements and i have no foreseeable plan to do so until information changes. great. thank you for that clear stance and the willingness to change it in light of new data peter. so good to sit down with you again and talk science, talk health, and in this case talk about the supplements that we're not going to take in addition to the ones that we do take. we will do this again sometime very soon, hopefully in austin. would love that. thanks peter. thanks man. thank you for joining me today for my discussion with dr. peter attia. if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our youtube channel. in addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both spotify and apple. that's a terrific zero cost way to support us. in addition, you can leave us up to a five star review on either spotify or apple. please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. that's the best way to support this podcast. if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or topics or guests that you'd like me to consider for the huberman lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on youtube. i do read all the comments if you're not already following me on social media, i'm huberman lab on all social media platforms. so that's instagram x, formerly known as twitter threads, linkedin and facebook. and on all those platforms, i discuss science and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the huberman lab podcast, other of which is distinct from the content on the huberman lab podcast. so again, it's huberman lab on all social media platforms. and if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter, our neural network newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter that includes what we call protocols in the form of brief one to three page pdfs on everything from neuroplasticity and learning to optimizing your sleep, to improving dopamine regulation, to foundational fitness protocol that includes both resistance training and cardiovascular training and details sets and reps. all of that and more is completely zero cost. you simply go to huberman lab dot com, go to the menu tab, scroll down to newsletter, and provide your email. and i should point out that we do not share your email with anybody. thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about nad and longevity with dr. peter attia. and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.