welcome to the huberman lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. i'm andrew huberman and i'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at stanford school of medicine. my guest today is coleman ruiz coleman ruiz is a former tier one navy seal special operator. i think it's fair to assume that most of you have never heard of coleman ruiz before, and in fact, it was part of his former life job description to be largely covert, such that only his family and friends really knew what he did for a living. he is, however, now living as a civilian. and the reason i invited coleman on this podcast was essentially to tell us his life story, which of course includes his time in the seal teams, but includes so much more that i'm certain is of value to everyone. today, coleman shares with you his remarkable journey from childhood through his teenage years into the military and some of the things that happened during his time in the military, which then informed his post-military civilian life and what it is to be a father, a husband, and somebody who has experienced tremendous loss at various stages of his life, as well as tremendous triumph indeed, if ever there was a life that could be framed within the context of the so-called hero's journey. it is the life of coleman, ruiz, coleman. ruiz is life is one that embodies focus and pursuit, family and friends, and love all the things that we think of in terms of having a rich life, but also one that includes many unforeseen tragedies, many unforeseen challenges, both internal and external. coleman also shares with a rare and extraordinary degree of vulnerability the extent to which challenges in life, both external and internal, have helped shape him as a human being. what follows is a discussion that everyone, male, female, young, or old, and regardless of position in life is sure to derive tremendous benefit from. before we begin, i'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at stanford. it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. in keeping with that theme, i'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. and now for my conversation with coleman ruiz coleman ruiz, welcome. thank you. very excited to see you. it's great to have you here. i'm guessing most people are probably not familiar with coleman ruiz, so let's start at the beginning. where were you born? what was the context of your home life? and maybe let's get up to maybe elementary school, middle school, and whatever top contour or deep details you want to get into. yeah, we're all ears. okay. i'll bring us up to seventh grade. 'cause i would say that was probably the first big inflection point in my life. i grew up in new, i was born in new orleans in a suburb called east new orleans east we call it, and have older sister, two younger brothers. my dad was a welder, my mom was a dental assistant, and we had a couple of boxers in the dogs. and we had a very modest, very modest upbringing. i won't overdramatize it, but you know, admittedly, you know, sometimes we got cheese from the lady across the street who didn't want her welfare cheese. and it was one of those, you know, i could tell my parents were fighting for every nickel and, but it was great. i mean, my cousin grew up across the street from me. he's exactly my age. we had that, at least some of my memory, andrew, of it was, it was very pleasant. i learned later that you forget a lot of things in your childhood that were unpleasant. but my initial memories when i started thinking about this kind of thing, and you know, as you and i have discussed getting professional help and you start to learn a little bit more about your childhood, but i remember it being very pleasant. you know, we've, you've told me about your background and skateboarding and stuff. you know, we skateboarded the neighborhood. bmx was a big thing when we were kids. it was very much a rat, the streets upbringing. there was a park behind the neighborhood. we would cut through the fence and go, you know, this kind of thing. i played football and baseball and very normal in that regard. went to the neighborhood school and then in sixth grade i went to, what was my high school, but it went, it went fifth through 12th called holy cross high school in the lower ninth ward, which that spot is now vacated because the school, i went back after hurricane katrina, the whole school had to be moved. and i went there in seventh grade and it was a hellacious start. i mean, it was detention after detention, you know, fist fight after fist fight. and damn near. were you the instigator of those fights? probably some. i definitely fell in with the wrong crowd initially in that sixth and seventh grade years. and i wouldn't say it was so extreme that like, it was complete mayhem, but i was definitely on, you know, problem, situation number, whatever. when my parents were called in and it was kind of the last straw type thing, and i got cut from baseball. my grades were fine. i was always a pretty good student. it was just teenager shenanigans. and then i went out for wrestling. can, can i just pause you for a second? so on the, the violence part, i have a little bit of experience with this, but violence can come from trying to protect others. yeah, instigating can come from the wildness, just trying to, you know, see what it feels like, experimentation and any number of other things. all the way to pure sociopathy, which we know you, you are not and weren't. do you recall feeling something inside that inspired this? was it for attention? did it feel good afterwards? can you recall what, what it was about? i think it was the wildness thing, andrew. honestly, it wasn't, i mean, i believe i don't have a malicious bone in my body. like we all have that in us. obviously my profession later in the military, you know, i was able to activate that and i feel like i still can. and i was certainly able to in sports, which is why that seventh grade year was really pivotal. but even now, it's funny, it's even funny you ask about the wildness, because let me put it in movie terms. like one of my favorite movie scenes of all time is in the movie, the town. when ben affleck walks in the room, jeremy renner is the, you know, his, his partner essentially. and he walks in the room and he says, we're going to hurt somebody. i can't tell you where and i can't tell you when. and he pauses, and jeremy renner takes maybe a three second pause, and he says, whose car are we taking? he doesn't even ask, you know, he's just, they're just wild and excited about doing something wild. i don't promote like going to hurt somebody. of course. sure. were you the ale or, or the renter in ale, excuse me. or renter in that. i was, i i, i feel like i was mostly the renter. put it this way, if, if you have some good idea this afternoon, like let's go fucking try this. i'm good, i'm ready. and i think it's just exciting. you know, i, i, i hate rules. i hate being told what to do. it's one of the things that was so frustrating about the military. i, the rules are in place for a reason. they're written in blood. i get all that, but we're so constrained sometimes. i think that was just all coming into fruition that seventh grade year. and i enjoyed going wild. like it was just fun. and frankly, we weren't these fistfights and this trouble wasn't like going to get some kid. the, those other kids wanted the wildness too, you know? and so, but the school didn't want that. and then i went out for wrestling that year and i could put it all into the wrestling room and it was awesome. before we talk about wrestling and why it was so meaningful as a channel for you, a little bit of neurobiology or else i wouldn't be great andrew huberman, there's a really interesting phenomenon that one observes in both animals and humans, which is that somewhere around adolescence when the hormone surge begins, but even before that, there's a phenomenon called dispersal. it's very different than fighting per se, or sexual activity per se. it's a, it's a literal dispersal from one's home environment or an animals a nest in which animals and humans, and we're animals after all, start forging new environments in, in a very, as you point out, chaotic way. it's not organized. it's a little nuts. and it, and biologists and neurobiologists in particular have observed changes in neural circuitry that that drive this. so some of it's hormonal, but a lot of it is the brain taking all this input that one has been exposed to sun, earth food, others social interactions and starting to essentially throw the different paints, the different colors of paint together and just trying things. yeah, some kids are more prone to this than others. certainly has a hormonal component. boys and girls tend to do this differently, but they both do it. and psychologists and neurobiologists see this as a fundamental shift in our underlying circuitry. so just a little bit of food for thought to put what you just described in context. with that said, tell us about wrestling. i mean, andrew, in many ways, like i said, that was the first inflection point. it was like immediate, i mean, immediate uptake within a week. i knew this was my thing. maybe, maybe the first practice. what do you think it was? so when i was younger, my aunt and uncle, when i was like seven years old, they started taking me to road races and i'm sure just running races one mile and 5k races, when i was really small kid for you to run, to run with them, they were into the road racing thing. back in the day when it was brand new, you know, the eighties, i'm 48, so i was born in 75, so i was seven, you know, eight years old at the time. and i was into like, obviously, can i win this race? i just, the pain of the effort was so comfortable. and then it's kind of silly, but like i won the pt, pt competition at like the boy scouts thing in audubon park. pt is physical park. yeah, physical training. training, physical training. yeah. and so i won like the whatever when i was young and built boy scouts or something and, and then it just snowballed. then i was just like, the physical activity still today is, i mean if someone said, what are you really in love with? it's, it's that. and so when i walked into the wrestling room, it was so extreme compared to anything else i had ever done. football, baseball, whatever. i never really liked any of those sports. i played 'em all, but i didn't like 'em. and always my dad wrestled in high school and college and we were, we were, you know, always rough and tumble in that regard. and i even have a couple of buddies in the teams, you know, who obviously were college wrestlers. there's a lot of wrestlers in the teams. and people would always joke about how we're so handsy and you know, our hands are always on each other. and that was just a thing for us. like, i loved the close contact, i loved the fight of it. what i really love about combat sports, 'cause i boxed in high school between wrestling seasons was the respect. tell me more about that. you just don't have, there are some of course, like you can see guys hyping it up and doing their thing in ufc these days and that's totally fine. but for the most part, if you have fighters of any type, like in a setting when they don't have to do, you know, the stuff for tv and whatnot, they respect each other because, and they respect the effort. and because you know what it takes and you know how hard it is to face another man in the middle of a mat with no equipment and know where to run and no timeouts and no one to tap in. that's extreme. you know? and it may not seem like high school wrestling is extreme, but as you just mentioned something about, you know, development when you're 14 and you're facing another, like that's the first time is someone trying to take your life? no, they're not. but it feels that way. and then you go and you put in all these hours of training and you don't eat during the week and you run stadiums or you run levees and you know, fireman's carries and, and all of it while you're not eating and making weight and you're in the sauna. and it's just a very tough thing to do. combat sports. and i love the respect that it engenders between the people who do it. i think it was sam sheridan who wrote a fighter's heart, an excellent book. yeah. and for anyone, male or female, any age who's interested in the human spirit, i recommend a fighter's heart because it's about the different fight sports, but it's really about the path of self-discovery that occurs in various martial arts. and as you said, like especially boxing is very gentlemanly. you touch gloves. yeah. you start, you know, then the, you know, the bell goes off, you go to your corner, like it's, you know, sometimes people lose it bite off people's ears and things like that happens. but, but for the most part, the sport is very structured. as you were doing this, what was happening with school? did it help your academic studies? did it keep them more or less the same? and how did your family and your peer group view what you were doing? were you considered strange for liking wrestling so much? i mean, you're dieting. yeah, right. you're a young male dieting for purpose of sport and performance. you're sitting in saunas, you're running in pla wrapped in plastic bags, all this. like, i mean, a good friend of ours who was also in the seal teams said, one said to me, he said, you know, wrestlers are different. and i think he meant different in quotes. yeah, well i think that's true. i, you know, school, my grades immediately went up, andrew. it was like up, oh my gosh, the discipline of all of it. my grades were always better in wrestling season than out of wrestling season. interesting. like when i was cut loose out of the structure, then it wasn't good. and, and, and you know, between seventh and eighth grade and all that, i didn't have any crazy shenanigans going on. i wasn't gonna get kicked outta school, whatever. i was doing normal stuff for the age, but so the fight stopped. totally, totally. 'cause i could put it into, i could put it into the wrestling space, you know, and i think i, i grew up obviously in new orleans and i think, you know, down there it's baseball, football, basketball. wrestling is not, i mean, i was lucky to wrestle in college at all because it wasn't like iowa was looking to recruit me. you know, they have plenty of people to recruit and they don't need any louisiana wrestlers. although daniel cormier grew up like north of the lake. he was four, four years younger. i was telling this to somebody, we don't know each other. i'd love to meet him. super impressive athlete. we heard that, hey, there's some kid up in the north shore, i think is where he grew up, whooping everybody's ass. and his name's daniel cormier. and then, you know, obviously the rest is history, but the sport is not big in louisiana, which is all to say that we were kind of a unicorn. we had, it was very odd. at my high school specifically, we had one coach, his son, either national runner up, his name was willie gatson. willie's willie passed away, i think his son ended up at iowa state. and within the last five or six years was either a national champ or a runner up. willie, when i was in eighth grade, andrew willie was at my high school. like i have no idea how willie gasson ended up in new orleans. but we ended up with this cluster of wrestlers at that time with the right coaching. and a few kids were going to junior college and coming back and wrestling in college and coming back. and there were three or four guys i remember specifically in eighth grade. 'cause i started, at least in the junior high ranks, i started to take off my second year. these guys would abuse me in the wrestling room. they were seniors in high school. i was 112 pounds or 132 pounds my freshman year. and they would just in my eighth grade year. and they would just abuse me, define abuse in all the legal normal wrestling ways. like there's the wrestling gets broken up, obviously by weights. you got the heavy weights on one end of the room, the lightweights on the other end of the room, and the young kids stay with the young kids for the most part. and a few of these guys would drag me down to the varsity end and i would wrestle with the middle weights and they would beat the shit outta me. and eventually you get to the point where you're like, fuck this, i have enough. i had enough. you know, and that's when sort of things started to turn. but i think that wrestlers are different. and my peer group, one or two of my really good friends wrestled, but most of them played other sports. and so, but in, in every sense of the word, life got better for me because of that sport. it changed my life. so you wrestled all through high school? oh yeah. yep. at, at that point, were you discovering relationships, girls? were you partying, were you a drinker? used drugs, no drugs. i mean, it's new orleans, right? it's like, one of the things that was tough, i'm glad i got outta the city, frankly, because it was party time out outside the season. yeah. girls, girlfriends, normal stuff in that regard. lots of drinking, lots of rat in the streets, you know, in those days, in the nineties it was, but you kept it inside the lane lines. oh, sounds like no drunk driving, no arrest. well, no, we did a little bit of that, but not nothing crazy in that regard. i think i understood the consequences and i really cared about my career. i really wanted to wrestle in college. my grades were excellent. my sat scores, not so much, but i started winning really fast. and you know, my last two years in high school i was 89 and oh, and i almost won my sophomore year. so i was runner up in the state my sophomore year. i always joke with the, with the boys. my all my boys are way better athletes than i ever could think about being your sons. yeah. oh yeah. right. and but in eighth grade i made varsity and it was like, was it eighth grade? yeah. and i lost like 75% of the matches, you know, but you just grind it out. and it's how i got into the naval academy, which is a whole nother story. but, so let's talk about that. so you finish high school, you head to the naval academy. why the naval academy? it's actually a crazy story behind this, which maybe we'll circle back to, but the summer, gosh, i had forgotten that this started in seventh grade too. the summer between my seventh and eighth grade year, my grandfather was too young to join the navy, and he wanted to go to the naval academy during world war ii. and he lied to the recruiter and he got into the merchant marines. his i'm pretty sure, first cousin, my uncle and my cousins are like first cousins once removed. my uncle jim farrell was at a family reunion in mississippi, which we were at. and he didn't mention the naval academy family reunion ends. they all go home. and he starts sending me naval academy paraphernalia. i knew nothing about the military, and i just thought about it, you know, and he would send me stuff, you know, you didn't, we didn't have the internet. right? you're sending these booklets and you don't like authority. no. so mil, i, i've not been in the military, but i've done some work with y'all. yeah. and there's a, there's a lot of hierarchy and authority. yeah, that's true. it it, the truth andrews like, it was just, it just seemed exciting. i wasn't really thinking about the implications as 18 year olds. you know, it looked very exciting to me. and having gotten some professional help in the intervening years, what i really think was a big part of it was my parents got divorced my senior year in high school, and the family unit just blew up. right? and so it also represented an escape. you know, get out and go get your life out of the new orleans and just go, just go do something. were you a part of that, that, obviously you were part of the family that got divorced. was it chaotic? was it controlled? you and i are the exact same age. we're both 48. yeah. born in 75. back then, it was a lot less common for people being, they called them broken homes back then. yeah, that's right. you know, nowadays, i don't think they call that everyone just cites the statistic that, you know, more than half of marriages end in, in divorce, as if it, it perhaps to normalize it. but that's more than half. do you recall feeling distraught about that? or was it just kind of the natural consequence of something you had observed a long time? you like, oh, that kind of makes sense that they no, it was a shock to me. it wasn't a shock to my older sister. i just remember com. this was the thought at the time. i, this is like searer to my brain. this has nothing to do with me. that wasn't like some sophisticated view. it was mostly, fuck this, i'm not dealing with this. i have my own life. they're gonna have to do what they're gonna do. meaning my parents, i'm getting the hell outta here. not a bad mindset for a kid at that stage. if it had been four years younger, that might not be the best mindset. but right. as you're heading off to college, that's a reasonably healthy mindset. yeah. as opposed to getting enmeshed in the what happened and, and this and that. yeah. can i ask you, at, at that stage, you're 17, 18 years old at that point, were you journaling at that point? no. no. no journaling, no introspective work? zero. no school psychologists? no. no. thinking about or talking about your feelings. it's wrestling, naval, academy, social things, school sats, like, like very standard. we're almost like talking like a superficial list of like what happens at the end of high school in 1992. and andrew, it's a, the, the word superficial, and i carried this forward for years, which i'm sure we'll talk about here in a second. those binary focus areas, like i was literally just going after them at full steam, stronger, faster, more intensity with zero introspection, no excavation of the, of 'cause of the psychology of anything. just full steam ahead. like, let's go no meditation, no breath work, no zero. which was not adaptive in the long run. mm. and we'll, we will get to how that played out in the long run. but nonetheless, you got into the naval. academy didn't first. okay. so i, i applied, i, i get, you know, my uncle's doing all this stuff anyway. i applied and i didn't, i still have the letter, the thanks, but no thanks, you know, you're not qualified. how'd that hit you? at the time? it hit me kind of like everything i did when that age when it didn't work out, it admittedly andrew, it was, it was like, there's gotta be a way around this. like shit has to work out. but it, but it feels terrible, right? like it, you have a moment of what do we do? and my kids have heard the story a million times. my wife was a blue chip swimming recruit for navy. and so she was into the naval academy when she was at the beginning of her senior year of high school. right. what's a blue chip? i, i mean my understanding of blue chip is like you are at the very top of the list. got it. and the coaches put you straight into the admission cycle saying nobody else gets in until this person does first. so they wanted her, they didn't want you. i not only was she a blue chip and i was, and i got the, no, i guess, well the wrestling coach called me a couple of weeks after my no, which is now in may. i'm about to graduate from high school. i'm not accepted anywhere. you only applied one place. actually, two, which you may bust out laughing when i tell you what the other one is because no internet. i got a mailer in a pamphlet from stanford, the wrestling coach. i didn't know what stanford was. i had no idea that the college was even prestigious. i didn't know they had a wrestling team. i filled out the application and wrote the letter thing and i sent it in to stanford. and of course never heard back from them, but i applied to two places, stanford and the us naval. academy. well, for those that follow wrestling, i didn't get into either. right. that's a great story. and i'll just briefly mention that a few years ago there almost wasn't a wrestling team at stanford. they had plans to cut the wrestling team despite having a ncaa champ champion at stanford. but, you know, the power of people gathering and, and petitioning works and wrestling and a few other sports that were being cut from the curriculum were spared. it's amazing. yeah. we're rescued. so happy to, to see that. yeah. yeah. so that, so it, stanford does have a wrestling team. so the coach, the coach, back to the, like, how i ended up getting in, i appreciated my, my college coach called and he said that i'm recruiting, i have one more spot at the prep school, which is in newport, rhode island. i'm recruiting another kid from pennsylvania. if he takes that spot, then i don't have anything left. and we were exploring going to prep, school and stuff like that, oblique ways to get in. and he called me sometime in may, like right around graduation and said, can you be in newport in july? that kid went to, i think he went to lehigh and i, i went to the prep school. so in newport, rhode island. yeah, newport for a year. i've been there. it's a nice place. yeah, it's great. yeah. and so you wrestle for a, i mean, you do school, you know, you're, you're in the west point has a prep, school and colorado springs as a prep school. and so we joked that my wife was first person in our class accepted. and i was last, which is highly possible. so you're in newport. does that have a, a portal to the naval academy? yeah. if you graduate prep school, you're, you're straight into the naval academy. like they fully expect you to be there the next year. when junior year rolled around and senior year rolled around of high school, didn't anyone pull you aside and say, hey, you might want to like apply to a few other places you might want to consider what you do if this doesn't work out, what do they assume you're gonna do? they just head into the city of new orleans and bus tables, zero guidance. andrew really like from my high school and i think the ecosystem i was in, like people just didn't really know how to do that. you know, how to apply to schools. i mean, my parents obviously helped when i applied to the naval academy, but when i, when i look at the system that kids go through now to go, you know, their process to find the best college experience, i never had one conversation with a guidance counselor about what to do. i just didn't, i mean, i just got very lucky. a few people, my, my high school wrestling coach intervened i think at some point and called the naval academy to speak to the coach to say you should give this kid a chance. but he didn't. they didn't know who he was. you know, i'm so lucky and so fortunate that i ended up where i ended up. it's, it's why i took it so seriously. like the focus with which i applied my time in high school. the, i took that to 10 x degree when i got to newport. 'cause i knew this was my chance. there's something magical to that. i can relate to that. so, so you're in newport. yep. and describe what a day was like. is it all wrestling you're taking general education classes like one does in the, in the first two years of university? yep. so the way that, the way the prep school is set up for the naval academy is they're basically teaching you the first semester of the naval academy. so you take calculus, physics, chemistry, i think you take an english class, et cetera. and you go through like a pretty hellacious first couple of weeks. 'cause you're away from the flagpole where no one can hear you scream. you know, you're up in newport, you're not in annapolis where everyone's watching and you do a couple hellacious weeks for an 18-year-old who's never been in the military before. so you're in the military technically if you go to this school, you're actually enlisted in the navy. okay. so they have place they own you to some extent. yeah, yeah, yeah, they do. okay. and then you do, you're wearing uniforms, you jogging in the morning, you're doing salutes and marching, have the whole nine. yep. you have bugling, they're doing taps in the evening. yep. all of it. got it. yep. and you live, there's 300 people at the prep school. it's distributed basically amongst folks coming from the fleet. so guys who did four or five years in the military somewhere and they're coming into the naval academy from the fleet and then athletes and then sort of a mixture of other folks who need a little extra school. right? and so, and then you do a full school year, you're competing, it's basically a red shirt year. that's not a red shirt year. i competed up and down the east coast against, you know, all the other prep schools. and you finish that year in may. and then, you know, you're done with the prep. the prep year is fine. it's a little bit of a, a shock when you're 18, but it's fine. always been curious about these military schools and the people that go to them and what happens to people there. did you have any sense of patriotism prior to arriving at this prep school and did that sense of patriotism, you know, i'm talking like love of country, understanding the, the history of our country and its position in the, in the international landscape. are you thinking about that stuff? are they feeding you that or is it really like wrestling get through the march, shower up, go to the next thing? is it, is it very like plug and chug? no, no. the, the feeding of, and i really appreciated this, the feeding of those concepts starts when you get there. but i was deer in the headlights, andrew. like, i didn't think about my life in this way at all when i was headed there. i mean, what, what you get very early, because the school very quickly starts to bring really high level accomplished people, colonels, admirals, whatever generals to expose you to this people. i do remember sitting there, the within weeks like this is way bigger than i thought it was in terms of how serious this situation is, you know, and how serious this ecosystem of people take this because i didn't have, my dad wasn't an admiral. he was a welder in new orleans. you know, i didn't understand the bigness of it. one of the reasons i ask this is that various times throughout my life i've had this experience of like seeing people close to me doing incredible work. you know, like when i was a postdoc at stanford, i had nobel prize was given that one week to the guy next door to me. yeah. so you see him in the morning and like you're hearing it on the radio and obviously i didn't have that kind of stature or talent in science. i think i'm a good scientist, but good enough to, you know, get tenure at stanford. but then there, there are levels within the game. yeah. yeah. but there is something very special to the experience of having people close to you physically and in the same ecosystem as you described it, achieving amazing things. i also saw this in skateboarding. i mean, there were a lot of, let's just say failures to integrate with normal life. but there were also some guys that i grew up with who started companies and set world records and, you know, had their pro models. and then if you zoom out from that and you go, wait, i'm in this community. yeah. it changes one's self view about what's possible. totally. so i think that's what you're describing and i think it's such an important thing for people to experience at some point, even if the goal isn't to be at kind of world scale, you know, for people to realize that the town they grew up in, the family they grew up in that context can expand. yes. and so do you recall being at this prep school and kind of third person in yourself and thinking like, well, i'm coleman ruiz, i'm from new orleans. i went from this to this to this the way you've been describing it and i'm here and they're like, i'm around some incredibly impressive people and i'm here. like, once you make that recognition that you're there, that that a whole bunch of things can open up. no, i actually came at it from the opposite way. and this has been a hard thing for me my whole life and i have to watch out for this perspective, is i felt like every day i had to wake up and earn my place there. i was never good enough for myself ever. so next day up is a restart to prove myself again on whatever standard i'm picking that day. right? looking back on it, i realize it was somewhat arbitrary because it was just day by day. i didn't think i'm coleman ru as i made it here. look, i'm part of this eco, i i was afraid, like mike tyson talks about being afraid every time. i was afraid every day. and i fought for like a position in this place every day. now that was adaptive in some regard, right? very. because to me it was, let's go like today's another new day and it's a hundred percent all in full go. i hope everybody's ready. do you ever call falling asleep at night and thinking like, well, like i had a good day. i had a good day. or, or i'm scared, you know, they're gonna discover i can't keep up totally or i can't keep up all the time. so a lot of fear, i mean yeah, yeah. a lot of fear all the time. and, and some of it i do bel i i i genuinely know and believe andrew, that it was well intentioned. like i wanted to do a good job for the group, whatever group i was in, my platoon, my squad in the case of the prep school. and you know, that first experience, i, i mean i, i was talking about this with, with my wife the other day, just 'cause stories come up. you know, we had a 25th reunion at the naval academy and this kind of thing, and i was a really good runner for my group in high school, like the people i was around. i ran cross country when i was younger. and anyway, i did, i suppose i'm going to the other, i, i sort of did have some level of confidence in my ability and then i got there and like all these college cross country runners are like, my son is now just crushing me. and i think sadly because it was just sort of in me that fed my fear like shit, i thought i was better than this. clearly i suck. i have to get to their level. so i did have a very well-intentioned excitement around, just do a good job with the people you're around. there's something fun to that and wild, you know, as we spoke about. but i was operating outta fear for decades. but there was a, i need to get to their level statement in there. it wasn't, i can't keep up. i better find a different path. no, no, no, no. i knew i could, i knew i could get to their level with enough work, you know. was that something that your, your father or your mother or both had instilled in you that oh, for sure. yeah. and my high school wrestling coach was, let's call it maybe from the old school, if you worked hard enough, you could, you could, you could get there. you know, so this is the essence of growth mindset long before gerald dweck coined the, the phrase growth mindset. yeah. it's, when i first read, i'm not there yet. when i first read her book, i'm like, when people teach us the shit when we were kids. yeah. you know, well some of us got it, some of us didn't. and it can be very context dependent, right? i mean, i think that's one of the more important and often overlooked aspects of carol's work and ally crumb's work is that we can develop growth mindset in one domain of life, but then another domain of life. we get, you know, kicked in the teeth once and we're like, i can't do that. there's a carve out where i can't function. some people do that, some people don't. yeah. that's interesting. and, and we don't understand enough about it to understand, you know, whether or not it's a global circuit, you know? and it's, there's a lot of context, but okay, so you're, you're hanging in there at least you're surrounded by some very impressive people. there's a lot of structure. yeah. so, so we're a long way from the prew wrestling days when it was oh yeah, yeah. this is the opposite of chaos. totally. this is structure. yeah. you're told what to do every five minutes more or less. and this is scary feelings. fears a scary feeling. yeah. but you're channeling it and you said the unit of the day became important. it's like, what can i do today? yes. yeah. you're not thinking about the week, you're not thinking about the season. you're not thinking about becoming some war hero. so down the line you're just 24 hours and do the next day. yeah. how was your self-care at that point? or was that built into the system? it's not built into the system and it was zero. i mean, it really was andrew, like it was the old school. we were not doing anything sophisticated back then. i mean, there's no, we stretched and, and in the grand scheme of things, it's gonna sound weird because there still is a lot of, you know, primal nature to combat sports. but in the grand scheme of things, we were probably on the upper end of sophisticated like wrestlers jump rope, they stretch, they do aerobics, you know, been in a sauna since 1993. you know, it's like not purposeful, not for to cut weight in a garbage bag, but there is some level of, some level of balancing out your training. you know, wrestlers like to swim in the, like during the season because you're getting outta that hot room. like you end up accidentally doing some of these things. but there was no self-care. so you eventually go to the naval academy 94, the actual naval academy, and that's where you met your wife. yep. nine in 96, my sophomore year. so when you get there, what, what's different than the prep school? first of all, it's big in the macro, not just geographically big or footprint square footage wise, it's big. the concept is big. you know, like the superintendent of the school is a three star admiral. you hear about his career, you know, you're 19 years old, you meet. so there's two incredibly important people in my life at, in those early years at the naval academy, a guy named doug zenbeck who's dead now, who most people of my service time will know who he is. when i was on my recruiting trip to the naval academy and i was in high school, this is complete accident. doug was a sophomore. we call him youngsters at the naval academy. he was a sophomore and we're the same weight class. so coach matched us up because it was my recruiting visit and my first, this is back to being wild. literally my first night on the grounds in the naval academy, i'm sleeping on doug zenbeck floor of his, of his room with his other two roommates. and sometime around three or 4:00 am i get woken up. it's like a bomb goes off, there's a bomb. didn't go off. but there's 12 other gorillas in the room. all wrestlers, maybe one or two other guys. and doug is hustling. i don't know any of these people. andrew. like i just met doug the previous evening. we just flew into town. he wakes me up, he's hustling me to get my shoes on again. i'm just this high school kid. and then within two to three minutes, all 15 of these gorillas bolt out of the room and doug grabs me and i'm just following them, right? so we race out of bancroft hall, it's maybe four in the morning, 3 34 in the morning. we race outta bancroft hall. the barracks we run across the parking lot into lajeune hall. in lajeune hall is the swimming facility and the wrestling room. that's it. that's the only thing that's in there, right? the doors, we run up to lajeune hall, the doors of lajeune hall are locked with a chain on the outside. and one of our doug pulls on the chain so that the door is open enough at the top that the 1 42 pounder can climb up and like get inside that little gap in the doors and run over and open one of the doors that isn't chained. this is what you'll later do professionally. i still have exactly. and what i frankly did as a kid, like back in the day. and so i'm terrified 'cause i don't know what's coming, you know? and so you, you don't bother to ask, what are we doing? there's no time. there's just no time. like these guys are to me, they're full blown war heroes. they're not, they're college kids, but i'm 17, they're 21. all these wrestlers, i'm hoping i'm gonna come here and be their teammate. you know, we run into lajeune hall, go to the second story. we climb up the utility ladder where public works goes to get in the ceiling above the white foamy ceiling tile things. so we're now on the catwalk where the hvac guys would be working and i'm starting to get a sense of what's coming. we go a couple feet down the catwalk, everyone stops, someone reaches over the catwalk and pulls one chalky ceiling tile out. so now you can look over the edge of the catwalk and see right through the ceiling into the diving. well remember the diving well has a 10 meter platform. and then we're another, i don't wanna over exaggerate this, we have to be another 20 feet into the ceiling. so you're above the diving board, what most people call that? oh, we're way above the diving board. okay. we're five feet above the ceiling, which is 20 feet above the 10 meter. got it. right. and so, and now i've realized what's happening. and two or three wrestlers get, they sort of, you climb over the catwalk, get, you know, backwards, get your hands all the way down, and then very lower yourself in a reverse pull up so you don't kick the ceiling tile. and three or four guys go and you can hear 'em hit the water after what is a terrifyingly long time when you're, you know, my age and i'm just scared in the dark. oh yeah. no one's supposed to be in there. and then one of the guys looks over, when you're a recruit, you're called a drag and they're like drag, you're up. and i'm lowering myself, andrew and i kick the adjacent ceiling tile and it hits the dive tank and it turns into pancake batter and goes to the bottom of the pool. oh my. and one of my teammates is like, you motherfucker, one of my future teammates, you know, he's going nuts. i drop, i live, and this is back to doug. i come up, doug clearly goes behind me, but i don't hear him. and one or two guys are going nuts. you high school piece of shit. like you're gonna go down to the 15 feet and pick it all up. and doug comes up and he just blasts everybody. he's our responsibility. this is not his fault. we brought him here. like just totally backs me up. and then the rest of the visit happens. i end up there. doug's no senior, i'm a freshman, and he's just the legend. he was all american. and to this day, andrew, you need to hear this loud and clear like for all the people you and i both know and the people i've been around, no other human in my life have i met with his physical and mental toughness. not even close. the guy was born in the wrong century is the way i describe him. and he was like my mentor and he was my guy, you know, and he was killed in oh seven marine. yeah. we'll we'll talk about doug. you've written about him. yeah. he's unbelievable. so i feel like i know him a little bit. thanks to you. we'll get around to that for sure. i think people are getting a sense of where we're headed. so that's the, to answer your question about like yeah, that the bigness of the naval academy, that's how it started for me. like everything was just on steroids, you know, all these kind of people. i get the impression at least up until now, that you're kind of just, you just go with what's right in front of you. a hundred percent. like there, there isn't a lot of pause and reflect, although your ru certainly rudder not this space. your rudder is not haphazard, it's not random. no. well, yeah, i can say right now you and i are as similar as i, you know, we may be in certain re respects, like we're very different in this way. like there isn't a, there isn't a like a foraging, you know, in biology we call them random walks, you know, a lot of, a lot of organization that comes out of biology is through random walks, like animal or human, like finds a node and moves and, and life is like this. steve jobs talked about not being able to connect the dots. yeah. except in retrospect. and i, and i subscribe to that. and his life was a bit of a random walk, but that we're guided by some central beam of, of uniqueness. robert green was when he was on the podcast, talk about that. he's great. y your beam is, is more narrow. it seems very narrow. and the propeller behind that beam is high. rpm. yes. that's very clear. and is what i'm not hearing here is like yeah. you know, at one point i paused and wondered whether or not i wanted to, you know, be here wrestling in the naval academy or, or even like, what i might do when i get out, am i gonna work for an investment firm? what am i gonna do? you're you're your horizon. it seems to be about 24 hours at that point. yeah, i hope not anymore, but at that point no, that point. oh, absolutely. at that point, i mean, i mean i'm no psychologist, but yeah. but, but it just seems like you, you're, it's not like you're playing checkers, but you're, you're optimizing for a fairly short horizon. there's no question. that's right. and the other part that was probably the most important to me, andrew, was the, the person or the group, because this is gonna sound very arrogant, but when i got to, i'm going to this prep school, i'm going to naval academy, i think on day one i'm gonna literally meet the cream of the crop in the country. and that was not the case. and it was not the case at the naval academy. and frankly, it wasn't the case in the teams either. like, i'm not saying i'm better than anybody, but i thought every single person, when i got to the naval, academy was gonna be entirely focused on whatever our mission was. and i didn't even know what my mission was there. right. i just knew i was gonna be told what wright looks like. and doug, not only did i meet him in high school and have the, the luck of having him as a teammate and a mentor for me, he is what wright looked like. so a focused beam and a propeller running at high prpm with the right, you know, quote unquote swim buddy so to speak, was literally all i cared about. that was it. everything else was white noise. were there other interests at the time? i mean, presumably you listened to music every once in a while, but i mean, i would, whatever, but didn't fall in love with it. didn't feel the need to pursue anything else. learn an instrument, do anything else. it was, it was it was a, that was it. it was a, that narrow beam. so you met your wife in 96, sophomore year at the naval. academy, yep. and was she as driven? is she as driven? i mean, she's obviously a very talented swimmer. i presumably works hard as well. it's kind of interesting. i, i didn't realize until a few years ago that the both of you are, you know, military. yeah, she definitely just different, different driven way smarter way more, you know, it's obviously not one to one for men and women, but way more successful by gradient standards. she's in the navy hall of fame. she was patriot league swimming champ. she was on junior national triathlon team when she was 20. i think really talented in every regard. ninth in our class. i think first female graduate, number one female graduate our class. tell me more about that. how's that, how's that work? you have a, i don't even know exactly how the grading, first of all, her grades are, her academic success is just remarkable. and then you get a military grade and you get a physical grade. not for your athletics, i don't think, but it's like your prt scores, which is your physical readiness test. all this military stuff you do, you get this other cluster of a grade that goes along with your academic grades. and she was number nine in the class and the first female graduate based on that cluster of grading. and i mean, she's an amazing person. was her success in academics and swimming, was that part of what drew you to her? no, no, no. i, she was just nice and, you know, i, i didn't really care about the achievement. it doesn't, it certainly sounds like i care about achievement 'cause of the narrow focus, but it, it wasn't really that, you know, she was just really normal in a group of a lot of abnormal people, frankly. like there's some kooks at these schools, you know, and i'm probably in that category. i don't know. but everybody's just really different. there you have this athlete group, you have, i mean, you know, andrew, i mean, you've, you went to stanford. i mean, some of the, you know, the group of naval academy in west point, like these schools who produce like the rhode scholar level person, like that cluster of group, like at navy, i remember. they're super impressive. i mean, and then there's the rest of us, like doing our best, getting pretty good grades and stuff. but there's very different groups inside, you know, the school. yeah. yeah. i looked at some of my colleagues, like a former guest on this podcast, ali cru, you know, she's incredible scientist, was a division one gymnast and is a licensed clinical psychologist. also maintains a, a healthy relationship with, with children in the home. like amazing. i just go, who are these people? you know? it's, i mean the, you know, every once in a while we talk about the, the person with the quote unquote extra gear. you know, like some people just seem to have that extra gear. and i don't wanna take anything away from allie or anyone else's incredible work ethic that goes with what people perceive as an extra gear. who knows if they have an extra gear or not. i always just wanna know what their parents did. yeah. and it turns out allie's parents, i hope i have this right, but recollection of this is that her mother ran a theater group and her father was a martial arts teacher. okay. so, you know, there's nothing that speaks to academics per se. and, and i find that really important to me and to highlight, because i think people hearing this conversation and hear about people like all's and other examples like that, you think, oh yeah, you gotta come from an academic family to end up at a, at a top tier institution or, or to win a nobel prize. in fact, there, there are so many exceptions to that. or you have to be a natural athlete or be born with some, some genetic gift or, or, or some extra gear as it were in order to succeed. but i think so much of success is the thing that you seem to operationalize really quickly, which is to really focus on that 24 hour horizon and where one is seeing failure to just keep going. i mean, a big part of it is just to keep going, but also to make sure that you're continuing to go in a direction that is adaptive and functional. because imagine had you not found wrestling and you had gotten into some, you know, some group where the, the, the metrics of success were around, you know, dealing weed or doing something, which back then was highly illegal now is very varying levels of legality. but you know, where the, where the points came back for effort in domains of life that could take you down into the gutter. and, and you see this, so i'm, i'm convinced that the work ethic is, is the fundamental piece. but there has to be that rudder. yeah. and the rudder has to be pointed in the right direction. so along those lines, you, you meet bridget? yeah. and was it instantaneous? no, we kind of had a friendship first. i felt like, at least we've discussed this. i mean, instantaneously enjoyed her company. so i met bridget in february of sophomore year. i was on the campus of naval. academy is called the yard. i was on the yard all winter because the wrestling season is in shittiest time ever. right? it crosses over the holidays. you have to make weight during thanksgiving. you have to make weight. during christmas we were on campus on the yard and it was easily waste deep snow. and we were doing two a day practices, everybody else's home on vacation. that winter i considered leaving and thank goodness for no cell phones and stuff, because i didn't know how to leave. it was like you considered leaving, like leaving the naval academy leaving the naval. i was just, but it didn't have anything to do with the naval academy really. it had everything to do with that moment. i was miserable. like i was making, i wrestled one 90 my freshman year and doug graduated. he was the 1 77 pounder. so sophomore year i dropped into his spot. i went down to 1 77. fighting weight for me is like 1 93. but you know, back then andrew lifting a lot. i was two 10 to two 15 in the off season and i cut to 1 77 sophomore year. and i was just generally miserable. and if it was easy to leave, i probably would've. and then i met bridget in february and i was like, fuck it, i'll stay. she's better than this place. anyway, having followed my high school girlfriend off to college and not gone to college when i got there, i just lived in the parking lot outside her dorm room. i, i can relate, you know, there's a, i probably wouldn't be sitting here today worried not for, for elany. so at what point did you decide you wanted to aim for the seal teams? it is a great question. i mean things, you know, as compared to, i had a gunnery sergeant in the marine corps at prep. school who i thought these are back to the first people you meet in this environment, gunny flynn. and he was great. like, he was super hard on us. but i obviously kind of love that. and i thought i was gonna go into the marine corps and doug wanted to go into the marine corps. i'm a freshman at the naval academy, he's my wrestling partner. doug could literally tell me to jump off of a building as long as he came with me, i'd do it no problem. and enjoy it all the way down. doug was going into the marine corps. i thought i was gonna go into the marine corps and i did a summer training in quantico between freshman and sophomore year. and it was okay. it was good, but i didn't love it. and i met a couple other guys who were gonna compete for spots in the seal teams who were years ahead of me. but to answer your question, junior year you get, you can sign up and say, i wanna start competing for a billet. we had 16 spots in my class. i think there's 32 spots these days. you know, the force has grown since nine 11, obviously. and, and i, i wanna say maybe 150 or so people, they put you through this weekend overnight, two day hell, two day things at navy. some people quit. i don't know how many go to what we used to call mini buds in the summer between junior and senior year. you go out to coronado and buds instructors, they still have it. it's called something different. you spend two weeks at the buds compound. they run you through a mini program. and so five buds for the, some, some folks listening to this won't know, won't know the acronym. the acronym is basic underwater demolition seal school. that's our school in coronado. it's a screening process for who gets in, who doesn't. yeah. and when you're at, when you're at the naval academy, it's obviously different than guys coming into the enlisted ranks. you have this pool of people, 150 ish guys say they want to go sometimes junior year, they run you through this weekend pretty hard at navy. 'cause we have seals stationed at the naval academy. and then, i'm just gonna guess that goes from one 50 to 80, maybe 80 guys go to the summer program in coronado when you're still, you know, a midshipman at the naval academy. i've never, maybe people have quit mini buds, i don't know. but i don't know if i really saw anybody quit the two weeks we're out in coronado and then you get, you know, graded on your performance and stuff. and then you come back for senior year and you go through a series of interviews with a bunch of seals who come out and do interviews and you don't really know what you're doing. and then they select down. i don't wanna again overdo it, but it's probably seven, i don't know, maybe 50 or 60 qualified guys. they select you down to 16. and so to answer your question about when i got interested was when i knew i didn't wanna go in the marine corps. i never ever had the top gun fever thing. i wasn't interested in flying, i just wasn't interested in anything else but something super physical. and that seemed like the best, the next best thing. and because i grew up in new orleans and spent a lot of time in the water, that wasn't intimidating. that screens a lot of people out, obviously. yeah. and got selected in the group of 16 and was at bud s after graduation, you know, a couple months after graduation. there's been a lot put out into the world around bud s you know, people have seen the log carrying and the boat carrying and the screaming and the set sit screaming of the the instructors. yeah. and the, and the running and the, you know, classed arms in the, in the water and hell week, no sleep and on and on. it's obviously tough. it, it calls 85% of the people that go out there thinking that they are the, the absolute last person who would ever quit ring the bell, so to speak. you obviously got through a while back, you mentioned to me three things that you think predict whether or not somebody's gonna get through bud s and before you tell us what these are, i just will just tell people that yes, of course. you made it through bud s successfully and went into the teams very successful career in the teams. you've also been a buds instructor, so you've been on the, on the, on the other side of the equation too. what are those three things? yeah, this was, as you know, this was very anecdotal, but it lined up, we, when i was back there in oh five as an instructor, andrew, i feel like we're not scientists, right. but i feel like we tried every correlating data pull that we could pull from pull-ups to runtimes to you name it, to regions of the country that people grow up near water, at least back then, nothing correlated. and so i was a first phase oic officer in charge. and so our team in first phase, we can talk about what that is in detail if you want to, but first phase is in charge of hell week, you know, hell week in the first two months of training. and a couple of the guys said all this bullshit about this can get you through, that can get you through. i bet that every single person we talked to out here on the grinder has one of these three things. they were a varsity athlete in high school or college. their parents are divorced or they got suspended from school. i guarantee it. and we would walk around the grinder and ask, and i mean, you know, this isn't gonna pass an independent review board, but it's gotta be 90 to 95%. so that's incredible because, you know, so much has been made of buds and hell. week and just to just fill in a few of the blanks for those that aren't familiar, hell week is what? it's five nights, no sleep. you get an hour or a couple minutes on, on one day wednesday and thursday, but you're basically in constant movement for about a week. you are. and that's when most people voluntarily ring the bell and most of 'em do it before wednesday. okay. and i know it's got chaotic components, guns going off blast. it's got hard work, boring components. people, the the people trying to make it through who have no sense of how long a run is gonna last or what's gonna happen. and you hear all this stuff like, okay, you just don't quit or you just go meal to meal. but what you just described is really interesting. let's break those three things down because playing a varsity sport has certain elements. having divorced parents has certain elements and getting suspended in school has certain elements. let's start with divorced parents first. yeah. 'cause varsity sport, i think we can probably just quickly say, okay, there's structure. you have to listen to somebody, you have to be able to push yourself. you have to have some level of physical competence and mental, coachable, coachable mental competence work with others. yeah. so there's something there. right. and you presumably have to go through junior varsity to get there. so there's some oomph and required in any event. but the divorce parents piece is, was surprising to me. yeah. still is. what you have divorced parents. yep. so do i divorces occur for any number of different reasons. what in the world do you think is the, the consequence of, or the, of a divorced household that would predict so well, at least in this back of the envelope measurement that you made. yeah. but as an instructor that people would get through this excruciatingly difficult period of time. for me, it was one thing specifically, i felt like i was alone if i didn't have the team. so i don't know what it would be for other people, but i was like, if i don't have this team, then what team do i have? so i'm not leaving. you could crank up the cold and misery as high as you fucking want, but i'm not leaving. yeah. that hits deep. i didn't do buds. i didn't even know what the seal teams were. but i certainly know the, the feeling of looking outside of the household for a sense of family and belonging. yeah. and the feeling that like, i'd much rather like from almost from a place of joy, like i'd much rather die for these people. hopefully not with these people, but much rather die trying to save others and to do well in that than to quit. yeah. yeah. that's, that's a powerful thing that you just shine light on. i don't think of the hundreds of interviews with team guys, ex team guys, buds instructors, et cetera, that are out there. i don't think anyone's ever highlighted that. and i don't think i was aware of it then, andrew. but i just, you know, again, it's in, it's in retrospect. well, the retrospect is in large part what we're here for. yeah. to go a little deeper on that, i think that a lot of people have challenging homes. the parents aren't necessarily divorced. and we're talk, talking of course, about trying to understand the, the human spirit. certainly not accomplishments per se, but the human spirit. so i think that a lot of people, especially nowadays, they look to their home life. and if, you know, god willing, they had a great home life that is the base. it's like the, it's like the touchstone for them that they can return to. but for a lot of people, even people who go home for the holidays or who touch in with their parents, whether or not they're divorced or not, they, they don't feel like that family unit is really a, a solid thing. maybe they're in a place, i see this a lot of where like they're the parent. they had to grow up taking care of the parents. i see that a lot on both the male side and the female side. i see that. so you're saying that one strong predictor of getting through is a feeling of people want essentially making it their like, almost like by biological identity to get through. it was certainly the case for me. i mean, when i got, and again, i don't really like to overdo these things because it tends to feed the mythos a little. but when i got to buds andrew, like i had, i, when i got to the naval academy, i had a very strong sense of this is my chance. and, you know, you develop over the years and you spend time thinking about this and having mentors. when i got there, that was very much my first time of, you better bring the nastiest shit on the planet because i'm not leaving here. like, it's just not, i'm not, i'm just not going. you know? and there's a navy bit to it too. like, i didn't want to do anything else in the navy. so back to fear, i was afraid i would get stuck doing a job i didn't like. but there's some people are not wrong, you know about buds. there's some very difficult days where you do start to wonder like, is this really worth it? and i, and that i never once thought about quitting. it never crossed my mind because i just had these other things that i really had to do for myself and my life, or else i felt like i was gonna have nothing. and so, again, i don't think operating out of fear is particularly adaptive, but sometimes it, you know, the bit in your teeth is useful. yeah. certainly in my own life i could say, you know, getting real scared about being 19 and essentially realizing i'm not good at anything. i'm not good at anything. and i was terrible at a lot of things. and some of those things were taking me down a dangerous path. that, that was the fear of, i'm grateful for the fear piece. it, it would, it, it scruffed me. and let's talk about the suspended in school. yep. piece, first of all, that implies getting caught. yes. not just misbehaving, but getting caught. yeah. what do you think that's about? so we're really talking about a sense of rebellion against authority or the system that one finds themselves in, which is super important for our line of work. like for me, again, i can only speak for myself. for me it was the wild fuck you factor. like you have to, there's just a nasty reality of the work we had to do. you know, i was in from 98 until 2011. in the seal teams, in the seal teams from 98 until 2011. everybody knows what was happening between nine 11. and then it's not that it didn't stop happening. i know, you know, from my own experience from oh three through 2010 was extremely intense. and obviously the military has rules and we need rules and you follow the laws of armed conflict and you follow the rules of engagement. there's no question about that ever. but the shit that happens to you out in the field for real does not follow any pattern. and so if you are a complete, you know, non-us suspended from school rule follower, i'm not saying you won't be successful. i'm sure plenty of people are. but in our line of work, if you ask people, most of them had a weird streak as they were coming up. like they have a little bit of a, a side eye when somebody tells 'em, this is how stuff is. like, hmm, maybe it's like that, but you don't know that. and where it really became clear for me, andrew, was look at every stage in your development, you're still looking for what right. looks like. and when i was a, i'm now a naval academy graduate, not that that means anything special, but i'm smart enough. i'm now in my twenties, i'm at bud s and have this recollection later. like you people are always telling stories about the teams. and when you're a new student at bud s you're, you kind of believe everything the instructors tell you because it's pretty impressive shit. and then you find out later when you, when i checked into seal team three and you actually start to understand the arc of the job, it's like all these guys were telling training stories. those weren't real combat stories. those, they, they never said that that was a story from training. and so my point is like, what, what you hope guys are getting it now. but what we didn't get a lot of was the real story in a sense. meaning i will say definitively, my first combat deployment was oh three when we invaded a rock. i was a platoon commander. we invaded a rock. and i remember within a week of being in that situation thinking not one single instructor had the experience to mentor and coach me on this not one. and so you have to go back to that wild suspended fuck you factor mindset. like all your silly rules about how the military works. none of that shit's happening out here. like all this other stuff is happening that doesn't have anything to do with your training manuals except for the things you don't violate, which is to your best of your ability. stuff happens. but the rules of engagement and laws of armed conflict, everything else is a toss up. the tactics aren't, that's not a toss up, but you know what i mean. like the environment is it completely chaotic? it's a new sport. it's a brand new sport that no one coached you on. and, and it's high risk, high consequence for you and your teammates, but also for the other side. i mean, every 15 seconds is a new consequential decision. yeah. 'cause you obviously don't want to kill civilians on the other side either. of course not. yeah. so you obviously get through bud s you probably weren't surprised given your mindset. probably weren't surprised. no, no, i wasn't surprised at this point. i'm maybe building a little self-confidence and just operate outta fear. but happy presumably. oh yeah. yep. and let's, i feel obligated to ask. well i'm just curious to ask that you, you know, you've been in a system of military for a long time. is there a, a bigger pull of patriotism there or that's just, it's there, but i mean, are you thinking about country or are you thinking about team? no, you think about the day, you know. yeah. i mean at this point, you know, i'm fully indoctrinated in a sense. you know, the naval academy really does give you a sense of, again, bigness. and you meet people from world war ii in vietnam and you know, an amazing guy, which, you know, we can cover later. i don't, i, i wasn't around when he was coming up, but colonel john ripley was a guy won the navy cross in vietnam. the book the, the bridget dong ha is about him. he knew my, this is back to, i was my uncle jim who introduced, he and my uncle jim were buddies. and i met him, he's since passed away. i met colonel ripley when i was a plebe at the naval academy. i work with one of his sons now friend, teammate mentor. he's a great guy. colonel ripley. he's a legend. like this guy's a navy cross winner should have won the congressional medal of honor. by all accounts, if you read the, but the, the book the bridget dong high, you, you are gonna have no ability to understand why he's not dead. and these are the kind of people you meet. so back to the patriotism, you know, thing, by the time i was in the teams, i, i knew where i was sort of in this ecosystem. admittedly though, what i didn't really have andrew, because it, i mean i love the country of course, but it wasn't, again, i didn't grow up with a dad who was like, you know, this was always in our house or just wasn't that big of a thing. this, this came for me after nine 11 obviously. but yes, the patriotism and the importance of the jobs there. but what, when i remember checking into seal team three, what, what emerged very quickly for me because we had vietnam vets in the training cell at seal team three and just some amazing people. what i realized right away was, okay, playtime is completely over. and that was very useful. like early lesson. not that anyone was fucking around in buds, like, you know, it's serious. but you meet a guy like master chief martin who's got a hundred combat missions from vietnam, he's about to retire. he was like the third person i met when i checked into the team. and you suddenly are like a kid again where there's just no fucking around. so you're in the teams presumably liking the work, loved it, loving the team component. it's hard. it's unpredictable and that's part of the, the fun. it's amazing. yeah. the job's amazing. you do a number of different deployments and at some point you get called to try out for the tier one tier one division within the, within the seal teams. maybe just explain a little bit of what tier one means. yeah. and you know, we don't wanna speak in code here, but yeah. we, you know, just inform people that there are levels within the teams and that yeah. tell us what tier one is. yeah, well i'll just refer to a special mission unit. it's probably the easiest. we have a bunch of teams on the east and west coast. as a lot of people know nowadays this shit was not public knowledge years ago. yeah. so, so you've got the, these different units within the, within the seal teams. yeah. so you, you have to raise your hand. you know, i was 10 years in andrew, i was at, i had had been platoon commander during the invasion of rock. we came to monterey. i went to school and went back to be a budget instructor. it was 10 years. i felt like it was time to, you know, take my shot. it's a little risky because it's hard to make it through, you know, green team and stuff. at the, at the special mission unit. it's a nine month advanced training program. you're 10 years into your career, you're not 22 anymore. and not everyone gets called the green team. not everyone can go, no, you can't say i want to go, i want to try out. you can say you wanna try out and you do a pre screener. okay. so the command training staff, i'll call it the command for purposes of this conversation. 'cause i'm familiar with that term. for us, the command training staff comes out, they put you through all this stuff. some of it's psychological, some of it's physiological. i don't think we did a blood test. but they checked, the trainers checked everything on me, which i thought this is actually a description of why the unit's tier one. i was even in the prescreening. it was the first time. the way i joke about it is like i really felt like i was doing what was in the brochure. like it was real varsity stuff. you know, i'm messaging a later conversation that we'll get to. but at this point have you ever sat down with a psychologist and done a therapy session that was no therapy, but i sat down with a psychologist 'cause they put us through the battery, the neo, pir, the raven, stuff like that. they're asking you how do you sleep at night? how do you feel? oh yeah, what do you dream about? how much do you drink? and you say two beers a week and, and you're lying at that point. everyone's lying. yeah. but now it might be two beers a week, now it's zero. zero. yeah. right. but yeah, so it was good screening process. like i was like, oh shit, these guys are not messing around. this is exactly what i wanted to do. and the physical tests ramp up. and coincidentally i worked for him later, still friends with him. now on my interview board was brit lebinski who won the congressional medal of honor. brit was on my interview board and he's great guy. and so yeah, then you just wait and if you get picked up, you go out, you know, to the east coast and you're really rolling the dice because i was on the west coast. you move your whole family, sell your house, you may have to sell your house. but we did. and you move and you're gonna do a nine month advanced training program at the command just to get into a tactical unit, you know, which we call squadrons. and the best way tactically for me to describe the difference, and look, my time at team three was amazing. i'm not diminishing it, but let me just use free fall, military free fall for anybody who's, you know, even done civilian free fall. so it's jumping outta place. jumping. yeah. so if you go, if we go to the job zone and we go jumping right faa regulations have you jump at 12,999 feet. 'cause as soon as you go above 13,000, you have to use supplemental oxygen. which is not a huge deal, but it's a pain in the ass for the airplane to have it. and so 99% of your jump, all your jumps, well at any standard drop zone, your civilian jumps are gonna be below 13 grand for all of our jumping at seal. team three is below 13 grand. it just makes the training more efficient. and you'll jump during the daytime, maybe a little night jumping, you'll probably have some lights for safety. and if you look outta the airplane, you would be able to see the orange tee on the drop zone. right? that's your standard jump profile. maybe you'll jump with some weight, you'll certainly jump with your weapon, probably your helmet, but not all your jumps. 'cause you're bringing guys from zero to be able to do tactical military free fall as a group. when you go to the command, your jumps are from 25,000 feet. you do 30 minutes of pre-b breathing on oxygen helmet, night vision zero lights, and a tack board that has your navigation system on it. a hundred pounds of gear, your weapon, your oxygen, all your shit. and 45 dudes piled up in a c 17. and you drop miles away from the drop zone because you're overground speed at 25,000 feet is hauling ass, you know, because of the wind. and if you take your hands outta your gloves at 25,000 feet, it's curtains like you're not gonna be able to use your fingers 'cause it's so cold. and you jump from way away obviously. and all your jump is completely blacked out. everybody turns ir lights on their helmets in there. infrared yeah. infrared lights. so you can see through night vision and you gotta fly that canopy multiple, multiple miles and land everybody on a drop zone. you know, that's, if you take every tactical thing we do and expand the same way, you would expand free fall. that's the difference at the command. which is, look, i was, i wanna own this when i was at team three, because you think about this, i had many, many moments where i was thinking, fuck it man, those guys aren't that much different. like we're we're super high end, right? and we are. and then when i got there, i was like, this is, this is another level. what, what percentage of people that go to green team get through and get sort of, i think i had 65 in my class. you don't drop that many. maybe 10 guys didn't make it or something. maybe 15 ish. so then you were, why did they call it tier one? no idea. it must have some official reason. like, 'cause if you go into like real documentation andrew, like there's there, there's echelons in, you know, this, this command is echelon this, this command is echelon this. and the military congress sets end strength numbers. it says the navy you get at the one time, because i took some class, the navy had like 355,000 people. and that's the navy's end strength. and they have to distribute those numbers across everybody in the navy. so i don't know why it's called tier one, but i think it has a, you know, has a reason. so you got through, you were accepted and then you're doing very different sorts of things than you were doing previously. very. so my understanding is this is largely counter-terrorist work. so all the work in the military and seal teams is high risk, high consequence. but now it's special operations as, as the name implies, where things have to be worked out. mm. on a, on a case by case basis. it's highly unusual. it was unusual before, but now it's highly unusual circumstances. what was it like to be there? did you like that family? i loved it. it was the best place to work. and this is 2000, this is oh six through 2011 for me. okay. yeah. so it's post nine 11 through 2011. yep. okay. so i'm sure a lot happened and most of which we can't and won't discuss. and that's not what's important here. yep. but clearly you met and worked with some amazing individuals. i happen to know, because we've spoken before and we have some common friends in, in the, in the that arena that you had both the privilege of doing this work and this really important war time, but also the unfortunate experience of of being close to and working with quite a lot of people that were killed. yep. how many? so, i mean, i don't know why i did this or why anyone does it. it's way over 40, but i try not to over affiliate myself with a larger group than i actually knew. but the people that i personally knew, andrew, it's exactly 40 and and we could spend probably weeks detailing how impressive each and every one of those people was in their individual case is that this is perhaps a, an opportunity to put a call out. there's a, a wonderful book, i think an important book that isn't so well known in the, in the array of quote unquote military and seal books, which is the book about adam brown. yeah. a fearless book. i heard they're gonna make it into a movie. but what i, what i like about the book is actually has very little to do with the seal teams. totally. that's the best thing is that adam had a serious, serious problem with addiction that he masked at times. and it came back to pull him under various times while he was in the teams. and i know you worked with adam and you're close. he in my green team. yeah. yeah. so that's a great book for anyone that wants a a a different sort of book. it's really about addiction and family and his discovery of the path out of all that. his tenacity is incredible, awesome, awesome book human about an awesome, awesome human. yes. so you do those years and then, you know what happens when you, you know, 40 people close to you die, i have to imagine involves that. you, you get pretty good unfortunately at taking what each and every one of those is, is a tragedy and, and just continuing. yep. so let's just talk about that for a bit. if, if you're willing. yep. so guys are getting shot and blown up and you're close with them to, to say the least. and what was your role in the, in the aftermath? like, like how, what do you do? you, you, you go to a funeral, you, you, you toast a few beers and then you go back to work. i mean it's, that's kind of, you know, in the most simplistic terms, andrew, that is exactly what happens. there's obviously, you know, a lot more that goes on, but if you script the diary so to speak, it's, it wasn't, you know, a funeral every three months. but on average, if i averaged out, 'cause i've done this in know excavating the last few years. we were at a funeral or memorial effectively every 90 days. and in that time period, but it wasn't obviously, you know, that simple. like for, for me and our family, doug was my first super close teammate killed. and it wasn't in the teams. right. i'm now at the command, i was back from afghanistan, from kandahar, this is way before the marines built up a hundred kilometers west of kandahar. we were operating six of us with like 180 afghans kind of the wild west back then. and doug was killed that summer of oh seven. and i got a phone call from a friend. i was standing in my kitchen in virginia beach and it was like, like the whole scaffolding of the world was just gone because at that age, and here i am, like i'm some kid, i was in my th i was in my thirties, but i'm thinking, you know, things get more and more serious as you go. like at that time. but when doug was killed and i was a paul baron, his funeral and, you know, we came up to annapolis, he was living in annapolis 'cause he was working, it's, it's now been publicly released, which is nice for pam because she can talk about it more. he was working at the agency and when after his funeral and just the days around that. and then i go back to work and what i mentioned earlier about doug and what i knew about him just as an operator. he had been a company commander in fallujah. he was on the front page of the la times. like tony perry is a reporter in san diego. he was in fallujah following doug. the guy was, and doug is not a like a public people, people just attracted to him to tell his story. i have so many stories that i heard later from his bosses, his regimental commander, you know, told stories about his unit in fallujah. i, his sergeant major and his amazing guy. i've talked to him about like what went on in fallujah. doug's just a fucking legend. i mean, he was awesome. and the dominant thought after his funeral was if things, it's not that you don't think they're serious and i, and i mean just about life, andrew, it wasn't just about combat action and hard deployments. it was about if doug can be killed, all fucking bets are off. they're all off. like, if i didn't respect the rules before and didn't think society was particularly ordered in a way that i respected, you know, shit that i think is made up. i knew when doug was killed that it's all fucking made up. like he was supposed to be the immortal one. and if he's not, none of us are like, everything has to be reevaluated. you know? how old was i? i was 32. and and you've got kids at this point? yeah. yep. yeah. ollie wasn't born yet, my youngest because you you now have three boys. yep. three boys. 21, 18 and 14. and the older two were born. my, my middle son was two at the time. and and did it occur to you at the point when doug was killed or maybe some other point that, you know, at some point you could die? oh, i mean that's what i mean, andrew, like i, you know, personal work and therapy afterwards. it, it was then that i started looking over my shoulder just in general. like everything was suddenly like has to be watched with a vigilant eye. something that close friends, close male friends of mine have told me, these are friends that are married with kids. and i've heard this from people that were in the military and, and as, as well as those that weren't, was that it was very important to them to marry somebody who were they to die. they knew their kids would be well taken care of. oh, that one's not even, there's no question about that. yeah. so that, that was a, a like a primary criteria. and i think in your line of work, i mean that, that must be especially important because the, the probability of of dying is, well, let's face it, is, is much higher. as, as my sister who doesn't like sharks once told me, she said, you know, the best way to not get eaten by a sharks is never go in the ocean. you know, there is a way to limiting probabilities. she'll swim in the ocean a little bit. yeah. but, but the point being that when you're in the military and you're, you're shoot, move and communicate is a big part of the, the job description and the, the enemy's also taught to shoot, move and communicate that there's a, there's a decent probability that you could die. so did you ever think, okay, well if i die, my kids are okay because bridget's solid or were you still just operating on this 24 hour schedule that you had adopted way back in the seventh grade? no, i think, well maybe i'd have to ask her that question. i think i was back the way from the 24 hour ledge a little bit. i i i knew that the boys obviously would be taken care of with my wife. like that was never even, and never crossed my mind probably until you just asked the question that was almost just like table stakes back to this adaptive but maladaptive behavior. when doug was killed, i just realized i had to work even harder to try to stay alive. 'cause if you met the guy there is, i'm gonna say it probably multiple, there is not a fucking human on the planet that was as tough and as focused and as hyper dialed in to how to do the job a hundred percent effectively as he was. and it happened to him, you know, and it, it, i just never, it, it's almost embarrassing andrew to say i'd never thought about it like that until doug was killed. and, and yet, and i'm not challenging that at all. yeah, of course. i mean, life circumstances, the other team gets a vote too. totally. right? i mean, i mean somebody can be seemingly indestructible. oh, so capable and talented and get t-boned in an intersection and die totally. right? like, like that. yeah. we've known people like that. all of us, you know, you hear these things, that's why they're called tragedies. yeah. we just, we just like to put it in context. what we have to remember is part of the beauty of taking a young person and taking all the ingredients that a person comes into. special operations, pick your service. i, i'm not, i'm agnostic. i mean, some of my best buddies are army and marine corps. like i'm agnostic to the service head. is it it, when you end up at a certain point, like, and you look back, you realize for 10 or 15 years i've been indoctrinated in a very adaptive way to believe that i'm immortal. because if you didn't, you certainly wouldn't jump out of an aircraft at 25,000 feet with no lights and you for hell for sure wouldn't go into some of these fucking towns we go into and end up in these firefights. like you have some weird, i i'll speak for myself. i was entirely convinced that i couldn't be killed. and i, i just because i was in some way, andrew convinced that our training was so good that that shit wouldn't happen to us. let's take a step back for a second and acknowledge that the truth all around that set of statements, which is that i think most people can think of the government and the training programs as honing the body, but it's probably not lost on you at this point in your life that the, you were, you're a weapon, your mind became a weapon, right? your, your body became a weapon. you were a weapon of the military from the inside out. and in the statement you just made encapsulates that. yep. and that weapon honed itself for a long time. but then that's what the military is. it creates weapons and of out of humans. and i'm not demonizing the military no, whatsoever. i wanna be very clear. i realize that statement could be construed differently. but, but that mindset encapsulates that. so, so with the other guys, i wanna make sure i finish your que so it started with doug and then, you know, i dunno what direction you want to go here specifically, but then it just kept going andrew, right? like at that time doug was oh seven and then we went to a rock in the winter of oh 7 0 8, which was complete mayhem. and the troop was, i mean my, my troop in the winter of oh 7, 0 8 were like fucking superheroes. and a guy named tommy valentine was the troop chief. and we got home and he was killed in a parachute accident after all that shit. we went through badger. a guy named mark carter was killed in that deployment. we got home and tommy was killed in a parachute accident. and me and a guy named dutch, we went up to minnesota to notify tommy's parents and his sister and his brother. and we're not, the navy calls 'em caicos like casualty assistance officers. these are jobs in the military where you're trained to do this stuff. you know, one of the things that's amazing about us is if a guy gets killed, we send a team guy there. but think about the team guy. like it's great for the family that you send the team guy, but we don't know shit about sitting with a family who's about to be notified that their son, in this case of tommy was killed, britt went to christina's house slab, bri lebinski, he went to christina's house and me and dutch went up to minnesota and i'm shaking right now. like i was shaking the whole drive. we had to get to international falls all the way up north. the valentine's are incredible people. and i, i mean, notifying a family was just, it was brutal. and so this is, this is the, this is oh eight and then it just keeps coming. it's nate and it's mike and it's lance and it's extortion in 2011. and in the middle of that, adam gets killed. right. like tons of people know about extortion 'cause it was a one helicopter obviously full. yeah. well, well maybe we just, just briefly wanna mention, that was august, 2011 as i recall. yes. yeah. august of 11. yeah. so, but in 2010 adam is killed and i got a phone call and, and i wasn't best friend. i mean adam had some very close friends as the command that i, i don't wanna make some, anybody give the impression that like me and adam were boys. we were, we knew each other well. right? we went through green team together. he was in a different squadron though. so you sort of get separated a little. and i got a phone call in the middle of the night from one of my buddies who's still in, who is, is another legend. and i answered the phone and it's midnight. i knew something was wrong and we were kind of in this pattern. then andrew, like actually a few of the commands were like our partner command and a bunch of other guys we work with in other units. it was a hard time. like guys were fighting hard overseas and that just comes with the consequences. we know, you know, and i get the phone call in the middle of the night, i'm like, ph. and so this guy tells me, you know, get your uniform, you need to come in. something happened. and i'm like, i fucking know what happened. like, tell me who it is. and, and they, you know, didn't wanna say it over the phone, which i get. and i, i had like one of those moments where i told 'em, no, i, i can't, i can't do that again. like you have to get somebody who knows what the fuck they're doing. and he just didn't let me off the hook, you know, get your shit and come, come into the command 'cause you gotta do all this prep stuff. and i walked into the conference room. i mean, i remember it clear as day andrew. i walked into the conference room and i could see it on everybody's face again. this is 2010 now. they were more terrified than i was. and these are, you know, civilian guys, guys who retired who are now civilians. they work at the command and amazing people. and they looked like, i dunno if you've seen peter jackson's remake, they shall not grow old. oh you have to watch it. they shall not grow old is peter jackson took real world war i footage. oh, i did see that. yeah. yes. and he put the color and, and the lip reading and, and, and there's a scene, i dunno if it's a battle of the bulge or exactly. there's a scene where this young unit army unit's about to go up over the top and, you know, run across a open field and the camera pans over and there's a young kid with his rifle in front of him with a bayonet affixed to it. his helmet on his lips are sort of flat and pursed. and he, everybody in that conference room looked like him. when i saw that movie later, i'm like, every single person looked like him. and they told me it was adam and we were gonna go notify kelly, his wife. and he had little ones at that point, savannah and nathan. yeah. they were small. and we knocked on, she had a sort of a stained glass like window and i could see her at the top of the, the stairs. that was the worst man. it was the worst. so we sat with kelly and a bunch of other guys were there. of course it wasn't just me. and we did our best. and i learned later and you know, reading paul's work, dr. conti and other people and like that was it, dude. i was like a, i don't know if it's a locust or whatever that sheds their skin. i literally like left a shell of myself on kelly's front porch and walked outta my skin. it was, that was tough. that was tough. and so that was kind of the tempo to answer your question. like it wasn't exactly every 90 days, but almost every 90 days from oh six to 2011 for me, i got out in the fall of 2011. it was memorial at the theater memorial at the people's house, you know, and our neighbor across the street in virginia beach, she lost her husband in oh seven. so one house over. so she was best friends with us, you know, and so you are trying to live two lives. you have this military life with all these consequences where every bone in your body is telling you to go full spartan. like, no, not that the spartans didn't have families 'cause they did whatever, nothing else. like just cut off every other thing in your life completely. you have to go do this and you have to do it full on because clearly all bets are off. like we're barely making it through. we're losing our best guys. and how the fuck do i survive if at this pace? and so, because we're all in the same community in virginia beach, you're around it all the time when you're home, you know, and you should be because you're supporting your teammates families. and that's important. but it was just, it's almost like a dream, you know, when i think about it now, how do, how did we live like that? how does anyone live like that? and i know, you know, my experience as the military, people go through, you know, all sorts of tough situations in different walks of life. but i have so much compassion for anybody who's trying to live in an environment like that where, you know, you are going on the next deployment and you know, i mean, look, andrew, we left bain in, in, in oh eight before tommy was killed. three fucking weeks later, guys are getting blown up in the same area. like, and they, they got all the debrief from us. they knew exactly where to go. but it was just such a kinetic environment. we just, it was almost like you couldn't stop it, you know, it was just like the ball's rolling. and when i think about people overseas and you know, different situations that countries find themselves in right now, i can feel it for, for them, you know, what they're, what it takes. it's a, it's an intense environment. yeah. certainly that comes through. i think years ago you said to me, and this will be an important way of, of setting aside which side people are on, you know, whether or not you side with one group in the middle east or the other, or you feel for everybody that one of the things that you said that really rung in my ears for a long time is that the warriors on both sides in their own minds, each and all of them are just doing what they think is right for them and their families. totally. like you cannot erase that fact, like, like whether or not the government of this country or the government of that country or group was correct or incorrect, whether or not you're even talking about a terrorist cell versus a military, a formal military group or special operations group, that in the minds of the warriors, they're doing what they truly believe is right for them and their families, and sometimes country as well. and when i heard that it was sort of a, you know, it's, it's sort of an obvious statement on the one hand, but it's a very important one, i think, to the psychology that, you know, everyone's fighting tooth and nail because they believe that they are right. or they're just fighting tooth and nail for whatever reason. and that was an important thing for me to hear. and i think about that a lot when i see any news stories about international conflict or terrorist, military conflict, terrorist, civilian stuff. even the people, there's something about the human brain. people get this into their mind like, this is my job. and they're doing it doesn't justify it. right? but going back to this thing of being a weapon, yep. humans can be trained as weapons and, and it's often not the weapons themselves that are making the decisions about where to go and what to do. sometimes it is, at this time, coleman, what's going on with the three boys, with bridget. i mean your, i mean, your boys have turned out really well. they're amazing. they're amazing, and there's no coincidence there. and obviously it was a team effort with you and bridget, but you know, there are a lot of things about the way, the scenario you're describing here that speaks to like, how can a home function, but obviously it functioned well and you know, it's, it's remarkable, but it can't be due to chance. so the, were you able to compartmentalize, like the moment you hit your front door, your dad at home, your husband, your, and was that a pause in a conversation with yourself at the front door? that's just something that becomes reflexive. i mean, i, i think it was just reflexive. it wasn't really a pause at the front door. and admittedly, the story i would like to tell is that i was super zen about it. and i had this process and i would come home and i would take this off and put on regular dad things. and i think i was just by the same level of effort that we put into what we were doing, bridget and every other wife, mom, at least the ones that i knew, they put that level effort in as well. it made our home life just very comfortable. so it was easy. like i didn't have to go through some process, right? it was, it, this is how i remember it, it was easy for me. i don't know if it was easy for bridget, she would have to answer that question. it was easy for me. and so i felt like, for the most part, like i was, i wasn't like platoon commander, dad, you know, some movie, you know, the great santini type dad, you know, i think pat conroy wrote great santini, his dad was crazy apparently. or it's like, that's what he writes about. it wasn't like that. it was more of this, this home is such a relief and bridget is so dialed that i don't have to, unfortunately hard for bridget, i don't have to do anything, you know, the time that i'm here, i can be here and then, you know, go away again. and, and so it's, as we know what trauma does to the mind, like there are many, many stretches of that time period that i just don't remember. and, and i, and what i do remember is mostly obviously the fun times, the front yard, the whatever, playing with the boys, doing roughhousing and going on vacation and stuff. but the, when i was in the grind, when we were in the training cycle of our cycle or deployment or whatever, i don't really remember sections of it. so a lot, far too many, i guess even one would be far too many doorbells ringing on doorbells, you decide to get out. was that a conscious decision based on time, conscious decision based on like, i would like to have the rest of my life. you're done. i don't like to call it a regret, you know, but it's just kind of emblematic of where i was. it was the right decision. i do not regret getting out at the 13 year mark. not for a second. it, i needed it. we needed it as a family. it was a snap, it was a snap decision. it was like a, what do we say, 24 hour dec? 24 hour horizon. i was standing on the ledge of the 24 hour horizon. right. and you said, what year was that again? remain. that was the fall of 2011. 2011. yeah. okay. so that's about four or five years right after extortion. four or five years before you and i met. yeah. yeah. so extortion, we can just, we don't have to touch into it too deeply 'cause people can look it up. but this was a, a massive loss of special. operations included a lot of seals. it was basically helicopter shot out of the sky with a, with a wrap, with a grenade, right? yeah. rrp, grpg. yeah. people can look it up if they want to. and there's a lot of material out there about it, and it's just can only be described as a tragedy. so, and i'm not trying to make light of it, i just think, you know, that we could do, there's a lot to explore there for in a different discussion. guess you're out now the probability that you're gonna die is much lower, provided it's not what my nervous system said. right? but you're, you're out and what do you do? meaning, what do you do with all that energy, the energy of the way you've been operating up until now, these intense battle rhythms, vampire schedules as as you call them, but also what do you do with all the energy of what happened? you know, i think this is where i think our conversation really hopefully has been related to other people as we've been going. but that, you know, sometimes i stop and i'm like, i know i'm supposed to process all this stuff, you know, that's happened. but it's like, what do you do when so much has happened or when something's happened that you know, you have to move on from, you know, you need to compartmentalize, but that lives in our nervous system. so are you thinking about that? no, you're coleman ruiz at that point. you're just, you're just going forward. it's just fucking crazy. yeah, i mean, i just didn't know, you know, it's 2011, it doesn't sound like that long ago, but still in 2011, this was not a topic for conversation, you know? and i took maybe one week to process out. i turned in my gear, i turned in my badge, and my next visit to the command years later, i had to be escorted on by people i worked with in the same fucking squadron. like, so within a matter of one week i'm a stranger. like i can't get on the base. i, there's reasons for that. i get that, but i'm just using it as a, to make the point. i mean, there was nothing dishonorable about how you went. no, no, no, no, no. it's just that there's security reasons why, why no once you're out, like you can't just drive on the base anymore. you know? and this is like emblematic of, of course i didn't talk to anybody about it. not even bridget. but at the time, in those first, call it couple of years or even couple of months, i don't know. the question you just asked me is the question. i was actually like, what do i do like, not with work, like what do i do period with life? like how do i manage my time? and i'm not some bumbling idiot. it's not like i was walking around the neighborhood, like trying to figure out where my house was. i, i had just been in that environment for so long to your point that i didn't know what to do. i didn't know what to do with my thoughts, my feelings, my, you know, i could go to the buddhist five aggregates my thoughts, feelings, perceptions, physical form, and kind like all these things i've learned about and thought about later that have helped so much. i didn't know what to do with any of it. like, i didn't know what to do with nights was, i didn't know what to do with, i thought the term ptsd was the, was the biggest fucking joke on the planet until i read all the symptoms. and i'm like, wait, wait a minute. and sounds, sounds like it sounds familiar. and so it, it's that andrew was just like, and so i remember like even the little things that kind of make the point of the big things. i didn't know how to get a dentist. like i just go to the dentist in the military. i, you know, i, i thought when i was walking around the food lion that somebody was gonna call me and say, come back to the base because like the bubble went up. you just, i had zero context and didn't have the cur or the, not even, not even just the courage, but know who to ask, right? it wasn't the mentoring. one of the most important books in my life in the last 12 years has been joseph campbell's, the hero with, a thousand faces for the back end of the hero's journey. and i haven't read it. i know i should, i know i should, you should actually listen to it. i should listen to it. it's better to li i i've probably only listened to five audio books in my life. i prefer to read in paper because i can take notes in the margin. that book is better. listened to hero with a thousand faces, the hero with a thousand faces. could you just highlight a couple of the things that you took from the back end of that that somehow shifted your mind toward like, like qd you, i, i'm thinking i coleman ru's circa 2011 is like, kinda like, what do i do now? and then something cues you. there's like a beacon someplace. it's like, i always think of this like a texture of something and you're like, oh, i want to, you know, you want to feel it more to get a sense of what it is that, is that about right? it was in that case for sure. so joseph campbell wrote that book in 1949. and the hero with, a thousand faces is effectively the 17 stage hero's journey. which by the way, george lucas says, and has said many times publicly, he built the arc of star wars around the 17 stage hero's journey. he credits joseph campbell's book for helping him. and if you ever read it or you go through the 17 stages or you see it or watch a short video, anybody, you'll see how damn near everybody's life, which is why it's called the monomyth. he describes it as the monomyth or the cosmo cycle. there's a little weirder term for it. but what he lays out in the book is, i don't know, maybe supposedly 2000 years of culture across multiple cultures. a book is incredibly complicated in that sense. andrew, when i, so i listened to it audio first and then went back to it and listened to it in paper. i could not believe how a human could put this narrative together, honestly. and so, but the summary, i struggle with the first 10 stages a little bit, but it, i'll try to come back to 'em. if you, if you look at the image, when you lay out the 17 stages, the way it's in a circle is the ordinary world. and the extraordinary world is on the bottom of the page, right? there's a horizontal line. the diameter of that circle goes horizontally across. and the extraordinary worlds on the bottom, the ordinary worlds on the top. okay? and so lemme talk about the back end of the journey first. 'cause what i was mostly concerned about with when a friend pointed me to that book was my return to the ordinary world. and he told me, you coleman, you gotta read this book. and so the back end of the hero's journey in the return section is three seven stages of the 17. it's the ultimate boon, which is you learned something big in life. it depending on everybody learns something where you, you sort of realize that something big happened to me, that's the ultimate boon. and you have this incredible desire to do something with it. it's either knowledge or it's experience or whatever. and the ultimate boon you have, and you feel like this life thing. and then the next stage is typically refusal of the return. you really don't want to come back to the ordinary world 'cause you feel that there is some level of consequence that maybe you can't handle or somebody won't understand, you know? or maybe it's too mundane. you'll be, maybe you'll feel adrift. totally. yeah. that, and this is in the description of the stages, what you just described as part of that description, the next stage you're coming up back into the ordinary world in this return is magic flight. and the way it's described in, you know, myths or in real life is you have to escape that extraordinary world in a, in a take one more dangerous flight or, or sneak away or something is catapulting you to take that ultimate boon and fight against that refusal. you're, you're taking magic flight. amazing. and then there is is is it, it's it's assistance i think. yeah. it's like assistance from a, like a special power or something, which could be your own or somebody else, right? and then, and then suddenly you're into the last three, which is crossing the return, crossing the return threshold into the ordinary world master of two worlds, where you finally realize through help and or process where you can hold these two opposing life experiences in place. and then the very last stage 17 is freedom to live. and when you can, i'm gonna give you my little pet theory in a second. when you can work your way through those stages, you can have the freedom to live. what i realized potentially happened to me, just my internal feelings about, you know, my coming in outta the military and back is if you skip or you don't figure out how to deal with the refusal to return and, and you just pick, i'm gonna call it the next big thing, you catapult yourself into a new cycle and you never finish. and one of two things has happened. you're either two people trapped in the ordinary world or you're one person trapped in the, in two worlds, i don't know which it is. like, it's either two worlds in one person or it's two people trying to live in one world. but shit gets crazy, right? because you just haven't done the cycling. it sounds very masculine, but if you read it here with a thousand phases, you're like, this journey is not new. like this is thousands of years of very typical human cycle. now if we go back to the top of the circle, lemme try to scream to the first 10, which will be very obvious for star wars fans. just think about what luke does. and i'm not like a superstar wars person, i've seen the movies, but it's a call to adventure. most of us have, have a call to adventure of some sort in our life. refuse to call help from a mentor crossing the first threshold, the belly of the whale, which is described as when you first truly separate, this was me leaving for college. when you first truly separate from the ordinary world road of trials, meeting the goddess temptations atonement with the father apostasy, which is kind of like dying a death while you're still alive. and then you're into those return stages. and when i first read that book and andrew, i was like, i'm trapped in the return. i'm trapped somewhere in the return just emotionally. and one of the places that i was absolutely trapped in the return was i didn't have the mentor to help me cross the threshold. i knew i had to move on in my life. i knew i had learned something extremely valuable. i knew that there was a way through. 'cause people across thousands of years of humanity have done it. i don't think i'm special. and i never had the mentor. i, i got mentors later, you know, a couple years out. and it reminds me that in the, so i got out in the fall of 2011 in the summer, one of my very good friends who lives in connecticut, he works in new york, he brought me to a lunch at some fancy club in new york with a guy named buddy buca. paul buddy buca, who won the congressional medal of honor. he was a west point grad. he won't the cmh in vietnam. i'd been around a lot of, you know, famous military people. lunch was very normal, but buddy was amazing. it, it was a normal lunch. we didn't talk about much like impact. we didn't talk about combat action or whatever. there was a green velvet set of stairs. we were leaving the club, the upstairs, we were coming down the green set of stairs if i remember. but he's a little bit shorter than i am. he reached out his le i was on his left. he reached out his left arm. i was a stair one stair below him. he stopped me. i turned to my right to look at him. he looked at me, he said, son, you have it. you know that you have it. pts and you're gonna have to deal with it. and we left. i got in the cab and i left. and i remember thinking, you might have it, but i don't because that's the old days. like we're, we were prepared for this shit. i was still convinced that i'm good. like nothing happened to me. nothing in the military happened to me. that's just normal stuff. and all of our training is a story i told myself, all of our training prepared me for that. like this, the rest of my life is just gonna, it, nothing bad's gonna happen because i'm good. whatever that meant. and when i started to learn more and read more and talk to people who were helping me, i remembered buddy telling me that. and back to those return stages, andrew, it's just incredibly important for me to understand that my journey is not special. we are part of a long history of evolution that people who go through very challenge and the, i mean the 17 stages in joseph could not be more accurate to like, to my life, particularly the return. and of course, if one looked from the outside, they would agree with your mindset then. and say you're alive. you certainly had done very hard things, extraordinary things. you're married, you got three kids, they're thriving ptsd, post traumatic stress disorder and things like it. 'cause i, i don't think any single acronym or diagnosis can capture anything. i think paul conte made that very clear to us in the mental health series. these are names by necessity, but it's a framework. it it certainly taught me something. absolutely. and, and, and certainly those who haven't been in the military, maybe had a seed event of something challenging or whatever it is, you know, many people struggle with, with these kinds of things that live inside them in their nervous system. they pack it down, maybe they don't. but that was inside you at that point. i think you and i first got acquainted in somewhere around 2016 when you and some other folks from tier, one community and related communities started coming to the lab. and my lab and i never really talked publicly about my lab has been involved with various things in canada and the us i'm not trying to create any mystique there, but it's, it's not, not a point of interest what we did. and, and, but i recall at that time just thinking like, this guy's just an amazing team guy. but in any event, you know, we, we got to know each other a bit. and my sense then was like, it's like a, that's kind of indestructible, right? you know? and now i realize nobody's indestructible. yeah. we're, we're flesh and bone. but, but if we may let, let's, let's fast forward a bit to a couple years later, if you're willing to talk about it. maybe talk about some of the, the evolution that happened. so you started working a job getting back into civilian life. yep. and i recall a conversation about this time of year, probably about three year, three years ago. yeah. and you had done what a lot of vets from tier one operations have done and are now doing, which i actually have mostly favorable outlook on, which is there now these are, i want to be very clear, legal and sanctioned explorations of the psychedelic space. right. and i remember you called me and you described the experience that you had had and some of the connection with warrior culture that that had helped emerge for you. yeah. so could you, could you explain what happened there? you know, probably the entry andrew is as important, you know, meaning it's not all about books, but this is actually another thing i've really learned. you know, i was very intellect and achievement central. and as you can see how easy the emotion comes out now, i kind of very frighteningly understand people who like, feel stuff a lot more. it's a whole other landscape. it's miserable. well wait. yeah, it is. and yet it's, i i agree. i it's a very uncomfortable space, you know, but we'll get, we'll get there. yeah. it's, it is a journey for me. i, lemme put it that way. sure, sure. so, you know, there's a bunch of other, a voracious reader. i, i really enjoy it. and, you know, my entree and little window into the world of getting that kind of help came from a lot of different areas. i found in our area a craniosacral therapist who it still seems like, 'cause i mentioned it to people and it sounds fringe to them, it's very light touch. not even chiropractic like an, it's closer to myofascial type of massage. some, some tapping. yep. yeah. some stuff very like tapping on the top of the head. the part i actually love the most is the back of the neck sort of manipulation is you, you're lying down relaxed. yeah. you're clothed. yeah. super easy in terms of that couple years of that just 'cause of athletics. i love massage and that's kind of my entree and so through the body somatics yeah. which frankly, in many ways is my favorite. back to the physical orientation to the world is, is what i, is what's useful to me. but also i, i mean i read sam harris's first book end of faith in 2006. and so i've followed him for 15 years religiously read all of his books. lying moral landscape and his, i don't, i don't know him personally, so public stuff notwithstanding, that's not important to me. but waking up and i took, i took an online course with robert wright, who, who wrote why buddhism is true, but that's really not what he's known for. you know, princeton professor, he's so funny. he's very humorous. and i started to work my way into, i don't, i don't have some, like, i don't want people think i have some like whizzbang like spiritual practice. that's whatever, you know, i, but it became very interesting to me, andrew, this this i, i needed to find, i started to realize i needed to find a way to back away from the 24 hour ledge. like that super hyper focus. i needed to get a little bit of perspective. one of my favorite short videos is richard fireman's pale blue dot. i needed to just back away, you know, that reminds me, thank you so much for talking about timespace bridging i think the other day. yeah. we make, we'll i'll cue people to that. yeah. clip in the caption. it's a way of taking oneself out of one's immediate sphere of vision and looking, literally looking further out into one's environment. and then back again as a perceptual exercise of understanding that as our visual field expands, our perception of time also expands the bending, the chunking of time. yeah. that in mine, your conversation years ago about horizon and activating the parasympathetic system instead of sympathetic, i, i just very slowly started to realize i needed to back away from the small picture and the reading and the cranial sacrum massage. and i was still not really getting consistent real help, but i thought i could do it through educating myself intellectually. and i thought it was time to, and it was, it has short term consequences. but long term it's been amazing to, you know, deal with the plant medicines in a, in a controlled and curated environment. and that experience was super safe and quite amazing. actually. the weekend or the three or four days was super intense, but i didn't leave there thinking again, i kind of thought i'm good. that was great. yeah. couple things. one, we've covered psychedelics on this podcast before. i'd say this not for liability reasons, but just to really to emphasize for people's safety, to protect them. plant medicines are illegal most places still. this is changing. mdma is has been filed with the fda as a po potential treatment. it's not yet legal. these things have p great power of, of he to heal in the right circumstances. and they also have great potential to harm in the wrong hands or circumstances. people with, you know, potential for psychosis, et cetera. but with that said, i remember i was on, i was driving, i was on a phone call with you around this time of year, about three years ago, maybe it was four, but i think it was three years ago. and i said, what was your experience with iga, dmt? like, and you said, you know, it was among the most profound experiences of my entire life. and i recall you saying that you felt that it had connected you through time to all the warrior cultures that had preceded you. not just us military, but all warrior cultures. and you sounded great. you sounded like better than great. you, you weren't high, but you just sounded like man, like, like something had had, had synced up. yep. and i thought, well this is great. you know, and i hadn't explored plant medicines, at least not in a long time. 'cause i had done them recreationally as a youth, which i do not recommend. it took me down a bad path, but, and more recently i've explored them in controlled conditions. but i thought, awesome, this worked. you got this new job, you're, you're, you did some very controlled and again, physician assisted iboga dmt experiences and you're telling me how great everything was. yep. and then about, i think it was about three, four months later, i got a very different call. yeah. and if you're willing, you know, i remember that call. maybe you can tell me about that call. yeah. so i mean this yeah. the experience. it, it was incredibly powerful. you know, humor is such a powerful way to get through hard times is why i'm laughing. yep. yeah. but it, it really was andrew, i mean, to be fair to thousands of years of, you know, people having experience with these things, we often joked about like, what poor sucker reached down and grabbed that route for the first time and chewed on it. the iboga tree. boy he found out. or she or she. yeah. to be fair, to be fair, probably, you know, some session that wasn't supposed to go that direction and someone chewed on the wrong route. but it was extremely powerful. i've heard that, you know, the five meo for some people is not much, it's like black for me it was just liftoff. and i saw an entirely perfect geometric mosaic in light blue and white. and that was the warrior culture connection. like that whole 20 minute ride was just something else. as you know, i guess i haven't done it, but noic is the word noic, yeah. yeah. that people use. and very difficult. i don't have the language for it. and couple months later the bottom dropped out. yeah. and, and it be, and i wanna talk about that now. yeah. i, i also wanna emphasize, i know a good number of people that have had the same experience you did with aga and dmt through the veteran solutions group. and i know marcus and amber capone very well, actually a bill just got passed in congress that saw that dan crenshaw helped, helped spearhead to bring funding to the use of psychedelics for ptsd treatment in, in military. and i should mention, 'cause this was interesting to learn that that bill was highly bipartisan. if i'm not gonna name off the names, 'cause if i do, there's gonna be a lot of cringing, screaming and yelling. but if it's like, if ever there was a bill that was supported from both sides of the aisle with the, like the most diametrically opposed names who came together around that funding, it's that bill. yep. and just striking. it's a, and so there's a very bipartisan thing. so i will say a number of people have been greatly benefited by the veteran solutions work, but, and we can't causally link what happened to you afterwards to that there's at all, there's a lot to it, there's a lot of contextual stuff. so we're not doing that. but we're, we're an open book here. yep. and i think that's a great group, by the way. veteran solutions is amazing. a few months later you said the bottom dropped out. so what happened and when did you start to notice it? and then maybe we can talk about that phone call. yeah, i think, you know, looking back, andrew, i think a couple things. most people who call me about, you know, friends who say, hey, should i go do this? i initially tell them, well, a hundred percent of the time i tell them no. until, until you get, i was having this conversation last week with a guy who i never met before. you need to stabilize your situation, whatever your situation is, through some very slow deliberate dr. conti level help. because in the case of, i'm happy to see that some people are using just a wider spectrum of on-ramp, not the nuclear option to start can tell you unequivocally, agan five m-m-e-o-d-m-t two days apart is the nuclear option. and it's not right for everybody. just, i'm not a scientist. there's no question that cannot be right for everybody. that just doesn't make any sense. there's other ways to enter, i believe. and when you say the con option will just, for those that didn't see the series with dr. paul conti, we'll put a link to, in the show note captions. but what coleman's referring to is talk therapy with somebody highly skilled. yes. and perhaps also prescription medication if that's necessary. maybe hormone therapy, if that's necessary. that's up to the physician. but, but clearly talk therapy with a skilled clinician, i believe i needed, i don't know what other people need. i needed a mentor to help me contextualize what i was coming from and what i'm going to, and my experience, you know, with the planned medicines was it kicked the door wide open and took that beautiful ice sculpture perhaps at a person's wedding and shattered it on the floor. and i was again, left alone, my fault, not anybody else's left alone to figure out how to put that ice sculpture back together piece by piece. and you, my belief is i could have avoided that by having a much more deliberate process. so when suddenly the ice sculpture was on the ground, and every bit of intellect that i built over, you know, however long for decades i was, i was flat on my back. and, and as, as i told you andrew, and i've been, you know, really verbal about, with so many friends who only wanna talk about it in quiet circles, which i totally understand and and respect. and if you want to talk about it in a quiet circle, like email the humor like pod podcast, and you can give 'em my cell phone number because i know how important it's to people when they're in that stage is that was another thing that i never thought was possible for humans. it was severe depression, severe, and, and i was so, because i guess i just never thought about it again or never had a mentor. the shocking thing andrew, was how shocked i was. it was like, if i had known something like this was real, not that i would've listened to anybody if they said it, but the most shocking thing was that again, this could happen to me. and when it did happen, i was completely unequipped to deal with. i could, it took, forget how weak, forget every other thing in my life. it took 10,000 x the energy of anything i've ever done in my life before to just put my feet on the ground in the morning. i could not pt i couldn't run and be like, i could not fucking function. i did function somehow to some level, but it was so terrifying. i, i just have, for anyone listening who has been through, i just have such incredible respect for people who have dealt with it and have learned to get through something like that depression. oh yeah. or any, pick the, pick the title. right. whatever tough situation someone's in emotionally, i have such tremendous respect for them because i would've been years ago, the guy who like just tightened up your boots and get to it. you just, it's not possible. like you have to get help from people who care about you. and you have to like, you have to step back away from the problem set somehow and, and work through it, you know, step by step. the one of the most helpful things. and i'm so feel so fortunate that it never really had, like the chemical dependence thing, it was easy for me to stop drinking. when did you decide to stop drinking? that was, it was around three years ago or so ish? prior. prior to, prior to this lapse into depression? no, no. right. during, yeah. right during, you just figured alcohol is a bad thing right now. yeah. and i mean, look, you and i have been friends for a while and i, you, some of the things you and i have discussed and i hear you talk about publicly, they were just good reminders. you know, one of the things i absolutely hate, but i do every day, which is wait 90 minutes to drink coffee. oh, it's the worst. i cannot tell you how much of a difference that's made in my energy throughout the day. i'm glad to hear that. and the drinking was similar. you know, i, i like, look, i'm just gonna drop it for a couple weeks and then suddenly my sleep's better, my fitness is better. you know, so, you know, we all, even my friend, you know, you chat about stuff, oh, what are you doing at this age? and i'm approaching 50. that helps you stop drinking everything else. like all the other recommendations come second, at least for me. was that pretty easy for you to do? because i know there's it and i just feel big culture of drinking in the teams. oh yeah, yeah. i was just lucky. so, so my point there is, you know, the, just the respect i have for people who, who work through stuff like that, and i was gonna say the reason i referenced the drinking is because i started reading a lot about the 12 steps. aa i've never been to a aa meeting, but the, the simpson, the ptsd and the 12 steps, i'm like, oh my god, this is me. like, i need to go through these steps in my own way. not for, you know, not for drinking, but for whatever this low grade, the way i've described it is, you know, the buddhist obviously called it's unsatisfactorily, this low grade irritation that i carry around every day. the one amazing thing that that couple of months did for me, and the way i described it visually, is if someone cut me from neck to belly and filet open my chest and took a propane torch and scorched me from the inside and then put me back together and said, start over. that's how it felt. that's literally how it felt. i mean, i could not believe andrew, and you can obviously, you know, and dr. conti can articulate this better. i couldn't believe how emotional pain could be so physically painful. that whole experience. again, the shocking part was the shocking part. i just, i, i just didn't think it was real. and so then when it was, and i'm like, how many fucking things do i have to deal with, you know? and i realized everybody deals with a lot of stuff and it was challenging. and then slowly, you know, it got better and better. and guys like, you know, friends, very close friends, a very, very small tight group were, man what, what people do when you finally tell them and you think, oh, this guy's gonna, he's never gonna talk to me again. they do the opposite. they rally immediately for you, you know? and then guys that aren't in your inner circle necessarily helping directly and they're in the next circle. 'cause now this is very weird. it's back to like the feeling thing. i can, not a hundred percent of the time, but a lot of guys in my community, if i speak to 'em and they're in a bad spot, i can detect it within five seconds. just the tonal and kind of like the tempo. and when you tell that ring of people, not your super inner circle, they dump it immediately. as soon as you open the door, they're like, hey man, i had a couple of tough like months. you know, boom. they're right in for the most part, they open up. yep. and that really scares me, andrew, because i know like, if we need, if we need to flip the switch this afternoon, like we can flip the switch. meaning, meaning like, i can go to old school 20, you, you know, 15 years ago we, that that's, that's what you and i have discussed in the past, has kind of come back to, you know, the fighter mentality is the, the, the problem with that, the hardcore intense focused, that's easy. like, it's so easy to do that tough stuff that's easy. this is the hard part. and that's what, you know, was so challenging. it was to go to people who normally we do, you know, the yeah, yeah, let's do this, let's do that. let's do something crazy and say, okay, well tell that same person who you've built persona identity, you know, around them. and with them they're like, you're this guy and then you have a tough spot. now you have to go tell them the opposite. like, i'm really not doing well. it's terrifying. it is terrifying. and i, i, but i, i second with, with, with both arms your statement that when we actually open up to somebody trusted, hopefully a friend or somebody close to us, but like some people go to clergy or aa or any, any number of the different resources. and those resources really are out there at zero cost. they really are there. if one, one has to look a little bit, sometimes a lot, unfortunately, but they're there. my experience has always been, and, and in observing others that there's something about the human spirit that wants to help. totally. and sometimes that help comes from somebody who's really been through it. but even if somebody hasn't been through it, there's something in our nervous system that sees real pain in somebody. and contrary to what we think, they don't judge and think that everything that the person who was hurting was before was a fraud. the contrary, they, they see it as a, as an act of strength and, but it feels like, like hell to reveal that it feel if, and i totally agree. i think all the tough stuff, all the, anything physical is, is like a, a fraction of the emotional pain. and i i thank you for highlighting the, the physical aspect of, of emotional pain. especially if one isn't accustomed to it. yeah. if one isn't accustomed to it, if you're willing, you know, how bad did it get? i mean, the call you we had suggested it was bad. i, i sometimes refer to a line and i, i'd be lying if i didn't admit that. i've seen that line a few times in my life. i've been right up next to it a few times. and now if i ever see it, i know to do many things when it first comes into my, my, my visual sphere. the line of course being that the point which one is considering taking their own life. yeah. something that happens far too often, even once is far too often. and we've sort of skirted around this topic after all the wartime stuff and the gunfights and people dying and the doorbells. there have been a lot of friends of yours and some of whom i know, but most of whom i don't, but to this year who continue to kill themselves. to put it bluntly. where were you at with respect to that line? because depression is one thing. there's mild depression, there's severe depression, there's recurring depression, there's man and on and on and on. but ultimately that's the thing that hopefully everyone's seeking to avoid. and it's a, yeah. how close were you? i would say there was probably, i really wanna say one day. and the truth is, it was one day. it lasted one day being that close to the line, but it only takes a moment to go. that's the scary thing, right? it's, and it probably lasted a couple of weeks, but there was only back to the buds thing. like i never thought about quitting. i thought about it one day. what, what was the thought? if you, i, i don't, i, it was, i mean sort of like the classic symptoms and i, i was up all night sweating and shaking. and it's back to the shock of it. it was okay. i actually was able to step like one of two things is happening. either i am fundamentally bad. there's no way you can feel this bad and be good. so one of two things is happening, like, i'm just bad, a bad person, which i know is not true or something bad got inside of me that i have to get rid of and i don't know how to get rid of it. and so sweating, shaking, you know, up at three in the morning and legitimately thinking this is just the scariest thing. and for anybody in the situation, you think with every ounce of your being that people are better off without you. and then somehow, thankfully through chemistry, neurobiology past learnings, i stepped back away from that very quickly. but the feeling of putting me up to that line didn't go away. i just intellectually was able to, it was kind of where the maladaptive behaviors, you know, back to training work in your favor, which is i'm not quitting. like this can't be just me. even though it did feel like just you, i mean you suddenly become the core of the entire existence of the universe. you think like you're it, you know, but in the negative side of it, not the adaptive side of it, because the pain is just so extreme and, but i was able to back away from it and then over, i'm so grateful to so many of my friends. i can't imagine how many hours, if we collect up those hours, how much time i spent with them on the phone. and one of my, in the, like, in those really hard weeks, maybe a little bit after that injury, one of my buddies, i was actually just talking to him yesterday 'cause i had time in the car. the tough love side of it at when you're feeling that poorly is a little tricky. like i wouldn't, i probably wouldn't deliver tough love unless i really thought the person could handle it. i think it's, you gotta really deal with kid gloves at that mo those moments. but one of my buddies told me, if you do something to hurt yourself, you'll have proven to every person who knows you that you are a fucking liar and a fraud. everything you've been about your whole life is a fraud. and andrew, i was, we were on the phone, i was like, whoa, my god. he just went 10 ring, i mean dead center. and it, that was a pivot. like that really helped me a lot. so that's what you needed. i mean, i, at that time, i don't, i don't know that that's what i would've needed. i recall when we spoke, because i obviously not professionally trained in any of that. i just remember thinking, how do i put in this this into language that coleman's gonna understand? and i just said it, you know, i think your goggles are, i know one thing for sure, which is that your goggles are foggy. so you gotta, so you have to outsource your decisions. now. i think you might've also told me to outsource my identity. and, and that helped a lot because it, it was that idea of you have foggy goggles, you're clearly like not on stable ground. everything you believe about yourself, just let it be the spokes of a wheel that somebody else can hold for you for a period of time. it was like, well, i can do that. and then my other buddy, i didn't wanna be a liar in a fraud. i was like, i can do that. and yeah. and, and i'm grateful for the opportunity. but you know, unfortunately, i, i had a few circumstances where people close to me were at, at that edge. and, and i, i'd be lying if i say i've been at that edge. so i, i knew where i had some sense of where you were at. yeah. and under those conditions, i don't think there's a playbook. i mean, obviously when people are have a plan and they're thinking about implementing that plan, that those people need to be put under protection from themselves. yeah. yeah. fortunately it didn't come to that. yeah. and you know, a few friends just did the basics, andrew, which was, i really wanted to talk to you at that time because i knew you would gimme some advice. you know, i was so uncertain about just the, i'll just say the chemistry, but the chemistry and like, something is not right. yeah. and, and you know, different friends offered different, and some friends just sat and listened to it all. and when i think back, it's like, i would take a bullet for them 'cause they just took it, you know? and let me offload it. it's, it's an amazing experience for pe let people help you, which i was never willing to do. no. and you were, we have to highlight something that might have been overlooked earlier. 'cause it, we went through it quickly, but that you were, you know, you, you're a commander of a unit, so you're head of a family. i know bridget's also head of family. there's a, there's a trade. you try, you go back and forth. right? exactly. but you're used to, you're used to leading and, and protecting others. and like, i think it's awesome that you're able to have access that, that raising your hand, asking, for, help. you have to, it's, it's, it's such a, it it's such a, a, a sign of strength and skill and doesn't, and it feels like the exact opposite in the moment. exact opposite. the exact opposite. and then we go to these narratives like, oh, if i've ever done that in the past, people didn't help that, you know, we come up with a million excuses. but in the end it's, it's, it's such a thing of strength to do that. so you did ratchet yourself out of that very, very dark hole. slowly. and i, i, i wanna place this in the context of this hero's journey. yeah. would you see that? you talk about the, the magic flight, the, that you are against you, like the refusal, you won't go back. but, so it was accepting, it seems that there was some pieces of you needed work. yeah. that there was this ptsd, this gentleman that you mentioned yep. saw that and you refused to kind of deal with it. and so shine a light on it and god, the universe, whatever your beliefs are, forced you to see it. yep. and you went to the very bottom, but not out the bottom. yep. what was the process of putting things back together? it, i mean, really, it, i mean, a lot of it, andrew was cutting out. i had, so as a practical matter, i'm, i mean, i'm gonna go just go back to regular therapy. 'cause i don't that, i mean, my therapist is amazing. she, so you're not, you, at what point did you enter a talk therapy immediate then immediately then, so you got a quote unquote therapist. 'cause oh yeah, yeah. i mean effectively, you know, and bridget and i, in multiple, at some point it was, it was bridgette was like, this is this is it like full-time help effective immediately. and i knew it was necessary, but if, if i'm really honest, like i would've avoided it. i would've somehow like tried to gut through the situation without like full-time help. and i mean, once a week therapy. yeah. so the idea of sitting down with somebody and talking about past, present and maybe some ideas of future yeah. was, was worse to you than jumping outta a plane at 3000 feet or going into a gunfight. not even close. not even close. and hearing yourself say that, dude, you realize how, how ridiculous, well, how, how untrue that must be at the physical level. but, but the, the nervous system doesn't know right. as dr to quote dr. paul conti the limbic system that is experiences or, or it creates this sense of fear and dread doesn't know the clock or the calendar. it, if it's like, if you go the meaning, if you experience that, there's the idea that it's gonna go on forever. i think that's the fear. that's correct. yep. that's exactly right. thank you for saying that. it, the fear was this will go on forever, but, so yes. it, the, i just did not want to, you know, back to bessel vanderkolk's, when i read this word in his book, body keeps the score, alexa theia. if that's a real thing where you can't put language to, you know, what's going on. i didn't wanna put language to it. i couldn't, i i just didn't feel like it, like i just felt like gutting through it. and then i got, you know, once a week therapy, amazing people. and i don't know andrew, the first three months was, you know, i mean gutting through, i just couldn't, i couldn't seem to shed that emotional like burden of pick the category of stuff from the last let was just say 20 years. it was just, and, and, but it was all, i couldn't stop it from coming out. and obviously that's a good thing. and so that just continued. and every day got, and when i say in this is the tough part for at least me, and i know a lot of guys like me, the gains are minuscule, you know, but things improved slowly but surely. were there ever moments where you felt you were drifting backward? not really. and that's, that was nice. you know, you see that there's some stall, you know, plateaus. you don't have to share this, but because i'm a believer that talk therapy can be very effective. certainly that's my, my experience. it's me. it's, i wouldn't be here if it weren't for, for two in particular amazing people who really helped me along the way, but in that way. but i do think there's a place at times for pharmacology to assist the process. sure. i know nowadays people here ssris and they demonize those that, that wasn't i'll come clean. so, and then maybe if you feel like it, you can, i hit a bout of depression in my, during my postdoc did a, a short run of wellbutrin bupropion, which is more of the dopaminergic noradrenergic. yep. agonism, mostly adrenaline noradrenergic. it really helped, it nuked my memory at the dosage they suggested, which meant i had to take a very low dose. and then eventually i came off. and i think that that's one thing i learned from conti, which is that most of these medications were designed to help people get over a bump. yeah. as opposed to be taking continuously. some people need to take 'em conducive. i i have been able to be away from that for a long time, but, but i think pharmacology can help. oh yeah. i think i'd have to go back and look four months maybe of pretty low dose of wellbutrin thanks to, yeah. okay. that sounds, yeah, that's about right. yeah. thanks to my buddy jimmy. you know, i called him and asked him what he thought and he said, well, you use a gun site on your weapon, don't you? and you use glasses if you can't see. nah. and you're reading glasses, you need glasses if you can't see. right. it's like, fucking take to bucha, man, chill. like just get it, get some space back to the space. time bridging concept. just get back away from the danger for a few months. that really helped. and that's very different than the backing away from the danger with say, alcohol or, or drugs. and, and look, i, my stance on cannabis is some people can use it safely. most people probably cannot, but some can. yep. but there's something different about the drugs that have a addiction potential or the drugs that disrupt sleep. mm. like ultimately, if you look at people who commit suicide, and i've spent a lot of time with this literature, in almost every case in the preceding weeks, there's a disruption in sleep schedules, meaning disrupted from what they were doing prior to that when they were not feeling suicidal. yeah. so, so then you think about alcohol, disruption of sleep, even if you think you're sleeping and like it's, there's a story, like a common theme starts to emerge. so you stabilize sleep, you were getting some dopamine and noradrenergic assistance from the low dose wellbutrin. and you're basically also just offloading. you're just letting it all out. yep. with a therapist. with a therapist. and the thing that strikes me as to your point about my resistance to the therapy versus jumping outta airplanes or whatever, the most important people in my whole life since day one have been people that have helped me. coaches, parents, friends, boom. doug work colleagues, the guys that i work for now. like other, you, you have all these people helping you and then you hit this thing that's so unusual. i'm like, i don't want anybody to help me and i don't wanna tell anybody about it. i was like, what is that andrew? that was the, it's like, what is that? and, and it's not like i wasn't in these environments where i've been coached and mentored, like i've had coaches and mentors all my ass my whole fucking life. like instructors, you know, it's a nonstop and i, i don't know, like i couldn't, i just couldn't do it until i did it. and then, and you know, it's been a process since and i'm super grateful for it. and i don't know where we are in the journey, but in terms of like the hero's journey. but i hope i'm at freedom to live some version of it. because with my re this is dangerous. 'cause i only say this like with my really, really, really close friends. i know this is going to more people in my cl i feel like a completely different person. and n none of that stuff really ever goes away. it's all a process. right. and i'm never gonna stop the process. but i don't even recognize myself in some ways anymore. and that's been a good thing because in those times when i was just on the 24 hour horizon, sometimes i just did not know what the fuck was going on other than exactly what i was doing. you know? and it's just an odd experience to be in a different place. and it's scary to know that without that experience and without people really kind of forcing me to get help and things forcing me, i might be doing the same stuff, which is a hard way to live, you know? or worse or worse, you might, you might not be here or worse, which has happened to many of our buddies, you know, and i want to go like retroactively hug them and collect them up in like a net and say, guys, just stop for a second. you know, like we, it doesn't, it doesn't have to go there. yeah. i, i feel that the yearning in that statement, i, i suffer from a terrible, very destructive, debilitating desire to travel back in time and fix things. it's like, it's like, i know i don't have my, my graduate advisor who, unfortunately all three of my graduate advisors are dead, but she used to say, my time machine's broken. yeah. anytime i'd raise something, you know, that, that could have, would've, should have my time machine's broken. and, and we know that. but i, i felt that statement in every cell in my body. it's clear you would, but you're also in sharing this, this experience and this information, you're, you're, you're doing that now in what we call in biology in the intergrade fashion. and, you know, somebody, many people are gonna hear this and, and q to the, the recognition of what's happened to them, hopefully before they get to that line. yeah, you have to. and you just gotta tell somebody, you know, it's like, it's crazy how simple that is, andrew. i mean, months. it's like, i can't tell anybody. i can't tell anybody. well, well, and, and maybe we drill into this a little bit deeper. 'cause i think that this really speaks to the, the, the global experience of, of being human, where unlike a physical wound where, you know, if you see bone exposed, you're like, this is pretty serious. you know, we all have different thresholds for what we can tolerate in terms of pain and, and seeing ourselves wounded, we all don't have to decide what's the difference between hurting and injured. but when it comes to psychological stuff, we don't know, you know, and we also are dealing with a, a world now where some people feel psychologically injured by everything, you know? so that's the extreme there. but what we're, i think, i think what comes through, and i think people need to perhaps highlight in their minds is when something's kind of nagging or scratching at you beneath the sword, that voice, what do you think that voice is? i call it the low grade pain. okay. for me, it, it was, there was a low grade, just slight hot burning starting in oh seven, probably before that. but it was, for me, it was a weird mix, andrew, of like an uncertainty, a seeking a, this just doesn't feel right. like it has to be fixed. there has to be an intellectual and achievement way to sort of get around. this is where the buddhist writing and thinking really helped me a lot. there has to be a way around this low grade unsatisfactorily. somehow my sense for me, and i'm obviously not, you know, the dr. conti in the room, just because of all the things i've learned and how it, it, it, it just had to be the, this constant, i'll, i'll use the word trauma, but for me it was, it was like something had to happen to our system. obviously it does, something happens to our system that is a little bit of a, it was a shock there. boom. and then a buddy gets killed and then you, it's not even always with death and you have extreme firefight or you know, close call and then it's just boom, boom, shock, shock, shock, shock. it's almost like getting tbi for the nervous system. it's just a constant high it, to me, it always felt like that constant high-end. now if you keep going, perhaps if you never recognize any of it and you just keep jacking the dopamine and the adrenaline your whole life, maybe you can just never recognize it. but for me, when i shut the engine off and i decided it's not really how i wanted to live, and i was trying to work outta that low grade, whatever i was residue that i was left with, it was like every time i came from home, home from deployment, i would get sick that night. like i would have a fever that night, headache and fever. and i tend to get sick at the end of the year. last two years, it was christmas, this year was thanksgiving. and you know, bridget and i always joke about it. it's 'cause i slightly turn the engine down a little and then the, you know, the immune system. yeah. that's the way it works. everyone thinks stress depletes the immune system and indeed it can. yeah. but if you think about it in evolutionary adaptive, you know, ways go, go, go, go, go allows you to stave off the infection or at least to not have the symptoms of combating infection. and then when you relax a little bit, go on vacation, boom, you get sick. which is not to say constantly stress, but you need to modulate. right. you gotta modulate. but when you're on deployments, you don't have the option. no, you don't. you're in, you're in gun fights every day. yeah. so as soon as you turn it off, you get sick. right. but in, for me, in this particular instance, what do i think it is? i think it was all of those experiences at once, turning the generator all the way off, or the electric panel fully off, and then it just all came out. well, for people or anyone listening who is facing that feeling, that underlying feeling or who is challenged with like a breakup, a loss of a loved one, fear about the future languishing because they don't know what the future holds or the feeling that quote unquote so much has happened or some combination of those five things. where do you think the healing process starts? i hope, again, back to the hero's journey, i hope for every single person that it's not a rock bottom moment, but it seems like if you follow a lot of enough people and you hear enough stories, you've talked with dax, right? dax shepherd. yeah. yeah. he talks about it nonstop. like unfortunately, i think a version of bottom is where the process starts. all the people i know, the stories they tell me, the process started when they hit some version of bottom. what, what's the quote that i love is you don't change until the pain of staying the same is worse than the pain of change. yeah. amen to that. i have experienced that more times than i would like to admit. and that brings me actually to this more macroscopic question. my understanding of the hero's journey from obviously i haven't read or listened to the book, is that we don't complete this cycle and then rest at the ordinary world where we are living in bliss and peace forever, we actually have to go around that wheel over and over and over again. hopefully not going to bottoms that put us our lives in danger. but yeah, it is not a, a process in which we, we ever really get to cruise. so let's orient coleman, ruiz in that cycle. you seem to have returned to the ordinary world for those listening and not watching. you've been, whenever you describe the, the feeling of getting through, but also the, that people assisted you, you smile as friendly a guy as you are. i think in the first three years i knew you. i didn't see you smile once. that's probably true. i didn't see you smile once. i just thought like, hmm. and these like tier one team guys, they're they're serious. they're locked in. they're locked in. but you smile a lot now. yeah. so i think you're back in the ordinary world, what are the things you're watchful for? like, like you're not drinking. you pay attention to your sleep. you always trained, you always did it. you call it pt, but physical training. yeah, yeah, yeah. i train pretty hard. you cycle, run, swim. yeah. lots of kettlebells. yeah. every morning i train probably five outta seven days. and the two days that i don't train, i'm in. i have a sauna at my house. i'm in sauna at least for an hour. so funny how team guys talk about getting into cold or getting in the sauna. like it's just a regular thing. like they, they don't, they never post it to social media for them. it's just, it's part of the routine. yeah. but i say that because i think a lot of people think it's like this esoteric biohacking thing. wrestlers and, and people in the military are accustomed to like sauna cold, sauna cold. just like cardio lifting weights. it's not this esoteric thing. no, no, no. i mean, i think on average there's a sauna in finland for like every single person in the country. so we, we didn't invent some amazing recovery process by doing sauna. right, right. what do you think, what do you think it is about physical movement that helps the mind? obviously it's not, it's, i consider it necessary but not sufficient. like you, you need to do the talk therapy, the working through the writing, the reading, the introspection, the talking to other people, maybe pharmacology. but it's, it does seem to be so important for resetting us. what do you think it is about physical movement? i mean, since it, it might go back to john rady's little anecdote in spark, you know, the c squirt, i guess swims around then as soon as it does whatever it needs to do, it just dies when it stops moving. oh yeah. when the, so the cs is this aquatic animal plegia as it were. that that when it lands on a, on a rock and stops moving, it actually digests its own nervous system. yeah. that movement is the great nobel prize winning scientist sherington. that said, that movement is the final common pathway. that movement is the way that the nervous system tells the brain and rest of nervous system that it's still needed here on earth. which i like. it's, it's like a, it's like a a it reminds us of our own utility. yeah. in a neural way. i mean, whatever that is, andrew. right. the chemistry and the neuro neurobiology of it all. this goes back again, going back to seventh grade, i was at the end of the rope on the detentions and the suspension. and i have this very clear memory that before my dad got home, like i ran laps, i don't know how many, but a lot around the block. and by the time he got home, i was like, whatever my punishment is, i'm good. like, i'm not worried about it. that physical activity for me all the time, i don't wanna overdo the runner's high thing, but whatever that is, that's what i think it is. like when i'm in motion or my heart rate's up, for the most part, everything's fine and i'm clearheaded and i cannot be, again, dropping and drinking. i can't be lethargic and sit around like i have to, you know, take care of myself in that regard. i watch my sleep super close. if it gets past 10 30, i'm in like a full blown panic. i need to get to a pillow. the, the basics, like, i don't do anything crazy really. you eat what you want. no, no. i would say on the neurotic scale of things, that's probably my most extreme. there's probably a little bit of cutting weight, kind of like eating disorder issues if i was guessing. hmm. not that extreme, but, so you eat meat, vegetables. yeah. yeah, yeah. yeah. but i'm, i'm a really light eater. i eat like a bird and probably at eight times a day, maybe more eight times a day. oh, easily. i'll have, you know, i'll thanks to you. i'll wait an hour and a half to have coffee, which is miserable. you're welcome. but it, oh, it's amazing. thank you. it's helped me so much. well, you know, i, i take some, some shit. i love coffee, some shit for it, because some people say, do i have to, well, if i train first thing, then i'll have my coffee. first thing. it was really to stave off the afternoon crash. but a lot of people find that experiencing that natural wake up and look it's 90 minutes. it's not, it's not like cutting out for two days or two weeks. or michael paul and i think quit coffee. and i was like, why the world would you do that? would you drink coffee? yeah. why in the world? i love coffee. love y mate. always have from from from first sip. which by the way, i had my first gourd of mate, caffe mate when i was four. there's a picture of me and my grandfather's lap. that's hilarious. argentine side. yeah. yeah. so, but the, the point here is that, you know, these practices, these things, i think they involve a little bit of discipline, but they, they, they really can't have an outsized effect, i think. oh my goodness. yeah. the, it's incredible. i mean, the eating thing and then maybe, you know, one more mental thing in this regard. i'll probably have maybe an avocado in the morning and then two hours later, maybe one hour later, i'll have sliced cheese and an apple. and then so you're a light grazer. really light. i probably have the smallest plate at dinner in my house. we've always been in great shape. like visually, you always, but you're, you're tall, you're lean, you're strong. yeah. thanks. yeah. i, i think we're realizing now that you can still train on, you have to be like gorging oneself with calories, all stuff. yeah. especially now, right? like, we're both approaching 50. it's actually surprising how much i've discovered we can do on how few calories. and i'm not trying to like, test it some crazy way, but then just eat throughout the day and, you know, macro life experience, andrew, i just cut a bunch of extra bullshit outta my life. big end little things. like i don't, i try to just do my job and, you know, do a good job at it and hang out with my people, friends and, and family and all the extra shenanigans. like i'll maybe do, you know, i was always doing some big race or some big mountaineering adventure or i was just piling stuff into my schedule. i might do one race in like in the spring. everything else is casual. i work really hard at it. i like cycling a lot. it's one of my favorites and go hard. but i'm not trying to race cat or, you know, win some event or that release of extra bullshit in my life has been as big as anything else. and your boys presumably take some time and attention and you're, they're great. yeah. the, your son's a runner for university level runner. a lot of our conversation gets to some kind of core features of being human and the psychology of challenge and thinking. one is, or others are invincible, discovering that none of us are invincible, but that we are renewable. that you clearly illustrate that there's a, there's clearly a, a message that everyone is gleaning from this many messages. but like, what, if any revision or adaptation do you think we need of the, of the concept of, of being a, a man growing oneself into a man. you know, i'm not a gender studies sociologist, psychologist, neuroscientist, but setting all the, the sociology and the, the, the nomenclature aside. like if you had a short list of things, like, it seems like you believe that it's important to be able to do hard things, but sometimes those hard things are not the hard things that you aren't, we think they are like sitting down and telling one story being more terrifying than, than going into gunfights overseas. yeah. yeah. it's, i mean it's funny that the prelude a little bit is i'm not a gender studies scientist either. a sociologist, i stay away from most of these conversations, you know, but, but they're barbed wire. yeah. they just, people seem to be so over activated over stuff. it's very odd. but for me, in my life experience, andrew, it's range like to use david epstein's book title, right? it's range. and i've noticed this so much because of parenting and watching my boys grow into men. if i think about, i'm gonna come back to range. if i think about myself at 17 or 18, not my parents, not my coaches, unless i really wanted it. you could not fucking tell me what to do. you can't tell me what to do now. like if i want it, i love the mentoring and the teammate ship and the things that get you where you want to go. but if it's something i don't wanna do, i'm not doing it, you know, no matter what. and so if i think about that in terms of being a dad or manhood is, let's take it back to my kids. like, i think one of the most important parts of my job is to release the grip and take the reins off and just barely keep them inside the boundaries of a lot alive. you know? 'cause they're gonna make all their own decisions anyway. and they have to. right? and so i think a big part that i see, and i saw myself a lot for years, was we over grip sometimes as men, like we are so afraid of losing control in a already uncontrollable world, that we over grip everything and i over gripped everything. and suddenly when i'm not over gripping stuff, things are going better. and when it comes to range, it's okay for me. it's okay to have your tough guy moments, your fighter mentality moments. i would never wanna lose that because no matter how much help i get when i'm out with my family or my wife or my boys, my head is on a fucking swivel. and if somebody touches them, it's curtains. and we need to keep that because that is just a part of life. like you have to be, you cannot move through life with blinders on. like, there are people who are not good people. and it's okay to have range and have that in your toolkit. what i don't think is okay to do is to let that slice of the traditional, whatever you want to call it, aggressive manhood, be your whole life. like, that's just not functional. you know, it's not good for relationships. it's not good for parenthood. so every other little tool you can put in that toolbox that takes you all the way over here to what we might consider, oh, coleman's, he's soft now. no, no. don't mistake my kindness or weakness. there's a category for everything. and i think that makes you such a much more complete person. it's made me a more complete person. it's, it's difficult. i feel like i'm brand new at being able to do other things in my toolbox. like you and i, like this part's easy. i can go jump to that in a nanosecond. this part over here of normalizing, you know, life across, across a whatever 80, 90 is, it's really hard to sort of excavate the normal shit. but that's what i think we need to do. you know what i mean? it's okay to be kind and calm and gentle and you know, that's, there's nothing wrong with that. and i'm guessing the word surrender probably held a far different meaning for you in the past. yeah. but a lot of what you're describing is surrendering to the realities of life that we can't control everything. ugh. and, and just how painful it is to, to undergo that surrender. and, and here i'm talking to myself too. it's been, it's a process i'm still deeply involved in, you know, as somebody who's tried to, you know, go rung over wrong as best i can. it doesn't, andrew, speak to our, like evolutions. like, that is so difficult, at least for me. and guys like me, i'm putting you in my group here. that is so hard to do. like, that just tells me more about the evolution of our male system. like, that part's so easy, and this part is not so easy. but man, it's a, it's a battle to remind myself, you know, slow down. listen, just the basic shit. you don't have to go attack every problem like a fist fight. it's tough. it is tough. and i think that the more that i resist surrender, the more that well, i believe in god. so i'll just say god, but god the universe or whatever it is for people. but for me, the more that god places me in circumstances that make the, the, the act of surrendering harder, like if i would just do it on my own, it wouldn't have to be so hard. i wouldn't have to, a good friend of mine, i'll been mentioned by the name tim armstrong, he just said like, you gotta hit every branch on the way down. you know, he was telling me i had to, you know, he was like, you're a stubborn punk rocker. you have to, and he was talking about himself too. like, there's certain, there's certain phenotypes where we have to, but, but the, like, the universe just screams out. you don't have to, you can actually just like lower yourself down on a rope to the ground and walk away. but, but then there's that stubbornness. but i think that the stubbornness is, has its evolutionary adaptations too. and, and the hero's journey, nothing in the hero's journey says that the transitions between these different states are linear, no, are of equal duration, are of certainty only that they exist. and that there's no way, as you point out before, to skip steps. you can't skip. yeah, i couldn't skip if somebody skips, nobody skips. i mean, yeah. mean nobody skip. it's like you hit every branch. no, nobody skips. and the, and whether or not somebody tries to skip through psychedelics or through being the toughest, or through the acquisition of money, or just focusing on family, you know, a family obviously is super important. but, but that's not going to accomplish the other aspects of, of, of the journey. it's a huge part of it, but it's not, it's not the only part, again, necessary not sufficient. yeah. it's like, again, it's the 12 steps are some, i'm not that experienced in it. i just read about it a decent amount. it's like hitting every branch. like, you gotta follow the steps, man. or you can live with that low grade pain nonstop. you know, it's, it's not a good way to live. no, because, because even if you're not conscious of it, it erodes you in ways that are very destructive. well, this, i wasn't conscious of it at all, you know, until the universe, as we say, came in with a fucking wrecking ball and said, fine, you're not gonna listen, sent you all these messages. you're not gonna listen. okay. i think it's important that we at least briefly touch on where things are at right now, because it would be remiss for us to give the impression that like, you're sitting there meditating, you're drinking your coffee, 90 minutes late, late after you wake up. you're sitting there in bliss and thinking about all the great things that happened, how you made it through, like, there's still a lot happening right now. so to the extent that you can share, you're working all the time, you're doing yep. nonstop. what are you, what are you doing nowadays as a vocation? i was in private equity for a while before i met you. running a company for companies for really good friend of mine named tom ripley. amazing guy. and then i stepped away because i was exhausted and i didn't know how to say it. i didn't know how to tell anybody. like i needed to escape again, take magic flight somehow, you know? and, and he and i are incredibly close. like he was one of the guys who is in that super tight inner circle. and then i came back to it with, you know, with this team that i'm on. and i serve as the chief operating officer at lid sports group, the largest brick and mortar licensed sports retailer in north america. we have 2000 stores during the holiday. we have 8,200 employees. and amazing team. the private equity firm that i work for is an amazing team, and the company's an amazing company and ama just incredible group of folks. and so, yeah, i work a lot. i was out here doing store visits in san francisco and la and that's, it's all good. and i think i do those little things all day long all the time. but no, i am not sitting on a mountaintop like most days. there's no meditation at all, andrew. it's, meditation is a workout. tom and i throw kettlebells around multiple times a week, and i do those other little things, but the difference for me is i'm okay with it. and, and i say that because i was incredibly busy, you know, before when i first got out of the navy, and i wasn't okay with it because i thought, this is, again, this is back to the hero's journey, i thought like the return to ordinary life was gonna be sunshine and rainbows. like, look, i have the ultimate boon. i had this big experience, not that i wanted to be like front and center in the media, but here i am world, it's calm out here, right? like, we get to chill and have a good time and sleep, and nothing is stressful in the real world. right? wrong. i just wasn't ready for that. like, i really genuinely thought that it was just gonna be easier. and so when we talk about the low grade pain injury and like the, you know, what is that, to me, that was one of the biggest frictions. like, holy shit, i did all this stuff, all these deployments, lost all these buddies, and there's no fucking rest. like the, the regular world is, it's not, it's supposed to be easier. at least that's the story that was in my mind going through all the stuff we just talked about. now i'm okay with it. like, i like it. i know how to manage my life. i know how to manage my time for the most part. i have a different relationship with my teammates and my mentors and my bosses and my own work life. and i love it. like, i feel like i'm back to in a very different way where i was when i was in the squadron back in oh seven, like, i feel like i'm on, oh, this doesn't get clipped, but for me, i'm on another level. like i really feel good about where i'm headed. and i haven't felt like that since i went into college. you know? i felt like shit was just deteriorating and now it's, it's not, which is, which is nice. well, the beauty of what you just said and everything you've shared today is that, i know if it occurs to you or not, but you've been providing mentorship to millions of people in the form of sharing your experience, of your own hero's journey. and i want to thank you for making it so clear as to what your experience was and being unafraid or perhaps afraid and doing it and telling us anyway. exactly. very afraid what that felt like even better in that sense, you know, and, and stepping into that fear, but also making it so clear that while your, your life experience is, you know, extraordinary seal teams, tier, one teams, all, all and all, you know, all of it that, you know, everyone's life has these components of extraordinary and the opportunity for extraordinary and the re return and renewal through the ordinary world. so much of what you shared is, has meaning regardless of people are male, female, young, old. so thank you for being a mentor today and for having the, the bravery for stepping out into the, the quote unquote ordinary world, which is oso unordinary, ordinary unordinary. and if you're willing, i think it'd be great to have you back in a maybe a couple years and see where you're at. meanwhile, you, and i'll be in touch often as, as we, as we frequently are. so thanks andrew. appreciate it. coleman ruiz, thanks for everything you've done. thank you. thanks for everything you're doing, and thanks for coming out today and, and sharing with us what real life's about. it's always great to see you. appreciate the time. it was a joy. thanks. likewise. thank you for joining me for today's discussion with coleman ruiz. if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our youtube channel. that's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. in addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both spotify and apple and on both spotify and apple. you can leave us up to a five star review. please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. that's the best way to support this podcast. if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests you'd like me to consider hosting on the huberman lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on youtube. i do read all the comments, not so much during today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the huberman lab podcast, we discuss supplements. while supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep, for hormone support, and for focus. to learn more about the supplements discussed on the huberman lab podcast, please go to live momentous dot com slash huberman. if you're not already following me on social media, i'm huberman lab on all social media platforms. so that's instagram x, linkedin, facebook, and threads. and on all those platforms, i share science and science related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the huberman lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content of the huberman lab podcast. again, that's huberman lab on all social media platforms. if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter, our neural network newsletter is a zero cost newsletter that provides summaries of podcast episodes as well as protocols in the form of one to three page pdfs, protocols on things like deliberate cold exposure or optimizing dopamine, improving your sleep neuroplasticity, and learning. we have a foundational fitness protocol that details cardiovascular and resistance training workouts, and all of that is available to you completely zero cost. you simply go to huberman lab dot com, go to the menu tab, scroll down a newsletter, and provide your email. we do not share your email with anybody. thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with coleman ruiz. and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science.